---
file: week48-TheKillers.md
title: The Killers
date: 2026-06-26
order: 48
---

Sometimes things just work out. *Hot Fuss* came out in 2004, right when I subconsciously decided that new music wasn’t a thing anymore. I was newly married, out of college, and was deeply entrenched in all the music I had been enjoying the first 24 years of my life. So The Killers just passed right by me. I am certain I didn’t even hear "Mr. Brightside" until the late 2010s. So yes, it *really* passed by me. Until this week, when I heard all of this:

* *Hot Fuss* (2004)
* *Sam’s Town* (2006)
* *Day & Age* (2008)
* "Runaways" (2012)
* "Shot at the Night" (2013)
* "Caution" (2020)
* *Pressure Machine* (2021)

More than anything, I’m glad for where The Killers randomly ended up in my lineup. I hear The Smiths in them - in some ways, it’s like someone said “I want the Smiths - but if Morrissey was a bit less melodramatic. Not none, just less". And then I hear the Talking Heads - not a ton, but “Joy Ride” had me thinking of them in a few ways. And then there is The Strokes, which I kept hearing over and over in their style and attitude. And as I got into their later albums, I kept hearing Wilco. I’m not saying that I know all of these artists directly influenced The Killers, but having immersed myself in them, it made me appreciate the shared DNA between them.

With all that new context available to me, I fired up *Hot Fuss*, and was immediately, 100% into it. The music for "Jenny Was a Friend of Mine", "Mr. Brightside", and "Somebody Told Me" is right in my wheelhouse. Great bass, fantastic drumming, and awesome energy. And the vocals are great as well - this is a "whole band" band. And, on top of that, they use keyboards and synths in such an amazing complementary manner - and the synth/keyboards never take over a whole song, even when they are prominent. Four songs in, and I was sold.

Now, *Hot Fuss* doesn't maintain that ceiling through the entire album, but this is still a really good album. Outside of a few songs that I didn't really connect with ("Andy, You're a Star" and "Everything Will Be Alright"), the album continues with strong music and really good vocals - with both complementing each other well. "Believe Me Natalie" also stood out for me - it starts out restrained, and then builds itself up musically over and over again, culminating in something great with the synth and horns augmenting the arrangement.

*Sam's Town* continues to bring a lot of the same great music to the table that *Hot Fuss* did. It doesn't quite reach the same "high highs" as *Hot Fuss* does, but that doesn't mean it doesn't have some great songs - and it's perhaps the more consistent album of the two. "Bling (Confessions of a King)" has a great beat, with some sneaky good keyboards and a fantastic energy. Everything works really well together, and the keyboards/drums continually grab me. And near the end, we hit a great three-song stretch, with "My List", "This River Is Wild", and "Why Do I Keep Counting?". "My List" has a nice, simple arrangement - and the keyboards and strings sound great. The vocal performance is strong and emotional throughout. About halfway through, the music fills in a lot more, but does a great job of still feeling like the same song. "This River Is Wild" felt like a perfectly named song to me - both times through I found myself loving how the music ebbed and flowed. The music rises and falls throughout, and drives hard in a great way during those rises. And then, at the end of the song, everything but the piano and vocals drop out and it has a great feel. This run ends with "Why Do I Keep Counting?" - and I will need to stop counting the things I like about this song (I also need to stop with the terrible almost-puns). A restrained start with earnest vocals. A great musical build-up around the 1-minute mark. The music already sounds great during the first chorus, and then the guitar comes in after that and makes it better. Then a nice musical start-and-stop to start the middle third. The great music combined with a vocal performance that just *feels so real* brought this song home for me. A great song on a great, consistent album.

*Day & Age* is an album that I would like even more if it weren't so overshadowed by *Hot Fuss* and *Sam's Town*. It's not a bad album, but it just doesn't live up to those first two albums. "Human" is a song I recognized, and it got stuck in my head each time I listened to it. The beat is infectious, and the synth is excellent. But after that track, my notes are littered with comments like "solid song". Not a lot of things stood out for me for the rest of the album... with one big exception: "A Dustland Fairytale". This song starts out small and then builds up really well - a trick The Killers pulled on me a few times this week (and it works about every time). The song feels like it's consistently building, and every transition works for me. Whether it's just strings and keyboards, or when the drums/bass/guitar come in, or even just the moments when the keyboards or strings peek through a *little* more, the music really works for me. And the vocals grow right along with the music. On an album that doesn't quite hit as hard for me as the first two, this song *gets it*.

The singles I listened to in the middle were all good, my favorite of them being "Runaways". The song has some great energy and transitions (both musically and vocally), and I really liked how everything kicks in more for the chorus.

That energy is something that I wish would have carried over more into *Pressure Machine*. I have a few issues with this album, despite liking some of it. I read about the genesis of the album, and what led to its creation - but the interviews starting almost every song repeatedly took me out of the album. That aside, I couldn't help but notice that this album marked a transition from a music-led approach to a vocals-led approach - bordering on Americana too much for my taste at points. That's not to say there aren't bright points, though. The album starts off strong with a few songs I like - "West Hills", "Quiet Town", and "Terrible Thing". They all have great vocal performances and music that complements them well, often a restrained musical approach that worked for each song. And how can I say anything bad about "Runaway Horses"? I don't get into it immediately, but once Phoebe Bridgers joins in, I'm there for it. The song has a lovely feel, and when the music fills out more in the second half (especially with the addition of the string instruments), I get pulled in even more.

And here is where a second listen pays off. I skipped through most of the spoken word this time, which allowed the album to flow more. Some of the more vocal-led tracks just made me want more of their balanced or music-led songs. But I also found myself appreciating more of the songs. "Pressure Machine" and "Getting By" close out the album with a great feel - driven mostly by strong vocals (and some really nice harmonies in the first song) and some lovely sounding strings that show up more as each song goes on. So who knows what a few more listens would do for me?

As I still evolve in my feelings about *Pressure Machine*, I can say for sure that The Killers are a band that I'm glad to have in my life now. I love their first two albums, and there is more than enough in everything else to make me want to hear more of what they have done. If nothing else, *Hot Fuss* and *Sam's Town* are in the rotation for me moving forward. Now, if I could just travel back in time a few years to the time when I was at Lou Malnati's and The Killers were sitting in the bar...

* Favorite Album: *Sam's Town* gets the slight edge over *Hot Fuss* just because of its consistency - it has a higher floor of the two albums for me. And it finishes really strong.
* Favorite Song: while I like the early hits ("Mr. Brightside", "Somebody Told Me"), this comes down to two songs: "Why Do I Keep Counting?" and "A Dustland Fairytale". From the moment I finished "Why Do I Keep Counting?", though, I knew it was going to be a hard song to beat this week. Every decision in that song works for me, and it gets into my bones.

So, The Killers killed it this week. What does Otis Redding have to offer next week?
