---
file: week26-JamesBrown.md
title: James Brown
date: 2026-01-23
order: 26
---

This week was an exercise in separating the music and the man. I'm aware that James Brown wasn't necessarily the greatest person, with multiple arrests and violence charges against him. But I also knew that he had a major impact on music across several genres, and I wanted to experience that. Being a life-long fan of Michael Jackson, this separation is something I'm well practiced in, at least. With all that said, here's the music:

* "Please, Please, Please" (1956)
* *Live at the Apollo* (1963)
* *Out of Sight* (1964)
* "Papa’s Got a Brand New Bag" (1965)
* "It’s a Man’s Man’s Man’s World" (1966)
* *Cold Sweat* (1967)
* *Say It Loud – I’m Black and I’m Proud* (1969)
* "Get Up (I Feel Like Being a) Sex Machine" (1970)
* "Get on the Good Foot" (1972)
* *The Payback* (1973)
* *In the Jungle Groove* (1986) <small>second playthrough only</small>

I'm going to start by combining all the singles together - mostly because these were all songs that I've heard before. They were what I was expecting all week - high energy, good music, a lot of "HUNNNNNH" yells while singing. You know, the kind of things you'd hear around a [hot tub](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xeSwrFKFNFw). "Please, Please, Please" brings more heart and emotion through the vocals than the others, and is probably the best example of Brown's vocal range in the bunch. The music in "Papa's Got a Brand New Bag" is great, from the iconic opening to the guitar work and an unsung hero on the bass driving the song. "It's a Man's, Man's, Man's World" was an interesting song for me, on multiple fronts. For starters, I've heard this song several times, but I don't think I've *ever* heard James Brown sing it. The number of times someone sang this on *American Idol* or *The Voice* is uncountable. But, not shockingly, I think James Brown did it best. But what really makes me conflicted on the song is the fact that it was considered so progressive at the time. A song about how men run things, but the women make it all worth it - somehow simultaneously a step forward for the time, and still undeniably sexist. Both times listening to it, I struggled to listen to it as a product of its time.

Time to lighten the mood a bit - and "Live at the Apollo" does that. This is a **fun** album, mainly because of getting to hear the audience experience and become part of the performance. I found myself smiling multiple times hearing the audience respond, hearing single people yelling towards the stage, interacting with the band. The audience reaction at the beginning of "Lost Someone" is fantastic and almost made me laugh.

In some ways, it's almost great that I can't point to a song that really makes this album, because it's just a fun ride with emotional vocals and great music. The music always complements the vocals well, and I found myself continually picking out specific instruments between the guitar, bass, and horns that would drive portions of songs - transitioning well between each.

I'm going to group *Out of Sight* and *Cold Sweat* together, because many songs appear on both albums - with the arrangements differing on each album. This was interesting, because I found myself strongly preferring one version to another - but not always from the same album. For instance, I loved "Nature Boy" on *Out of Sight*, the strings (especially the cello) was just striking. The mood created by the bass, drums, and guitar throughout the song really pulled me into the story of the song. But when listening to it again on *Cold Sweat*, the music just didn't feel as strong, and the song almost slid past me. Conversely, "Mona Lisa" mostly washed past me on *Out of Sight*, but on *Cold Sweat* the piano felt beautiful to me, and the strings elevated the song in a way they didn't on the previous version. I liked "Good Rockin' Tonight" on both albums, but the piano and horns on *Cold Sweat* stood out even more and it was one of my favorite songs on the album.

But overall, *Out of Sight* was the stronger album for me. "I Got You (I Feel Good)" is perhaps the James Brown song I knew the most before this week, and it... feels good. The vocals are the star, while the trumpet opening is iconic, the bass/organ/cymbals set the mood to complement the vocals perfectly, and the tempo change around the trumpet instrumental break is awesome. And the version of "Come Rain or Come Shine" was so good, it made me feel like it was a mistake to re-record it on *Cold Sweat* (even though that version was good too!). The trumpets and strings are amazing, and the vocal performance conveys such deep emotion. Perhaps more than any other song, I really understood the moniker "Godfather of Soul" when listening to it.

*Say It Loud - I’m Black and I’m Proud*, and specifically the title track, gave me an opportunity to step outside of my own life and what I take for granted. An anthem for the Black Power movement, it addresses racism and the need for empowerment - something that I wish still wasn't an issue today, and that I feel both lucky that it's something I don't have to think about every day, and guilty that it isn't something I think about more. On the music front, the horns and guitar are great in the song, with some strong bass. But while this might be the most powerful song on the album, musically the strength of this album is on the tail end. "Let Them Talk" and "Maybe I'll Understand" were two of my favorite songs of the week. "Let Them Talk" is full of emotion, and really highlights Brown's range from subdued to powerful vocals. The organ provides the mood for the song, with the bass and guitar driving a beat that kept grabbing me. And then the horns coming in late add something extra that rounds out the song. The guitar leads the way in "Maybe I'll Understand", even though it's subdued throughout. This might be my favorite song lyrically from this week - and the vocal performance conveyed the feelings behind the lyrics perfectly.

Listening to *The Payback*, I really started to notice the arrangement of multiple electric guitars. I know lots of artists do this, but for some reason, it really stuck out to me (and this continued into *In the Jungle Groove*). Thankfully, *The Payback* was less problematic than *In the Jungle Groove*, where a few songs (namely "It's a New Day") made me wonder how the same person that wrote a progressive-at-the-time "It's a Man's, Man's, Man's World" also could write super-sexist songs. Outside of "Get Up, Get Into It, Get Involved", I didn't have a lot to say about *In the Jungle Groove*, with many songs having good music but going on way too long. But, I did really like *The Payback*. The title track had a great groove created by the multiple electric guitars. The opening of "Doing the Best I Can" evoked Jim Croce vibes for me, one of the highest compliments I can give to a guitarist. The vocals in "Forever Suffering" are accompanied by a strong mood set by the guitars and drums (got a lot of Ray Charles vibes from the vocal work). The horn section absolutely kills it in "Time Is Running Out". "Stone to the Bone" would be an amazing song if it were half as long, with the two guitars and the horns overlaying a simple drum beat, the composition was masterful. And I can't say enough about "Shoot Your Shot" (and eventually I will still try).

It only took a few songs this week for me to start to connect some dots. This was Miles Davis, but with lyrics. This was some of the vocal emotion of Ray Charles, but more often with more upbeat music. A fun thing about this music process is getting the payoff of seeing how artist A led to artist B, and this was a huge confluence - with Ray Charles influencing James Brown, and then James Brown influencing Miles Davis, George Clinton, OutKast, The Rolling Stones, and others.

One of my favorite songs growing up was ["Higher and Higher"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k1odvp-_bhk) by Jackie Wilson. This week provided me with the same enjoyment, with James Brown's energetic vocals and infectious grooves. Yes, some songs went on too long. A few were uncomfortably sexist. But overall the music was great, and the charismatic vocals are iconic throughout. I didn't spend nearly enough time talking about James Brown's vocals, but similar to previous artists I've delved into, like Mick Jagger, Ray Charles, or Ozzy Osborne - when you hear James Brown, you know it's James Brown. His voice is distinctive, with the range to sing a slower blues song to an upbeat R&B song. I'm looking forward to future weeks when I can feel the influence James Brown had on those artists similarly to how I can now retroactively see it with artists from previous weeks.

* Favorite album: this is a tough one - *The Payback* has such great music, and I can't say enough how much I loved the multiple electric guitars playing off of each other. *Say It Loud – I’m Black and I’m Proud* ends stronger than a vast majority of albums I've listened to in this entire project. But I keep thinking about songs on *Out of Sight*. "Come Rain or Come Shine" has such strong emotion. "Nature Boy" has a striking intro and I really dug the beat. "I Got You (I Feel Good)" is iconic, with great music - perhaps the quintessential James Brown song. And the piano in the last few songs is flat-out lovely. The most complete album of the week for me, and the one I'd revisit first down the road.
* Favorite song: and now we are going to talk about "Shoot Your Shot". Looking back at how I've talked about many songs during this project, I really shouldn't like this song. It's too long. It gets repetitive at times. And yet, I **loved** this song. The intro - starting with the two guitars, and then the horns join in - has an awesome groove. A keyboard (Hammond organ?) joins in at a few moments and it's great whenever it does, especially around the 5-minute mark. There is a tempo change around the 3-minute mark that is killer. Every time the horns come in I love it, and the saxophone crushes it around the 6-minute mark. The vocals are enough to notice, but they also allow the music to shine throughout. Yes, it's a long song, but each part feels deserving of its time, and from beginning to end I really enjoyed it.

After last week, where I was relieved to be done with the artist, this week leaves me excited for what's to come. I enjoyed James Brown a lot, and I almost can't wait for next week - where I listen to the artist that more than any others, I can't believe I haven't listened to more already: David Bowie.
