---
file: week31-BobMarley.md
title: Bob Marley
date: 2026-02-27
order: 31
---

I feel like I've been adjacent to Bob Marley for decades. Yes, I've heard his music here and there, but more than that I've listened to covers of his work for decades. I've listened to Eric Clapton's *Timepieces* countless times, and that starts out with "I Shot the Sheriff". Like almost everyone, I was really into the Fugees *The Score* album, and their cover of "No Woman, No Cry". But until this week, I had never really listened to any of his work directly.

* *Catch a Fire* (1973)
* *Burnin’* (1973)
* *Natty Dread* (1974)
* *Rastaman Vibration* (1976) <small>second playthrough only</small>
* *Exodus* (1977)
* *Uprising* (1980)

Cards on the table, this is a difficult and complicated artist for me to write about. I'm aware of Bob Marley's cultural impact, and I'm very aware that while I listened to Bob Marley all week, I am not sure that I am able to [*hear* Bob Marley](https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=Hohb_gOI0dQ). Last I checked, I'm a middle-aged white man who has lived almost all of his life in the U.S. Midwest (just checked again, still the case). For as much as I love love and care about injustice, I'm aware that I cannot actually put myself in place of someone who has lived much of what Bob Marley sang about. All of this adds up to a nagging thought I've had all week: I feel like I have to absolutely love all of his music, or I'm either 1) listening to it incorrectly, or; 2) I'm not the correct person to be doing this.

I say all of this because I have mixed feelings about what I listened to this week. There were a handful of songs that I genuinely loved, and a few more that I liked and feel memorable. But, the vast majority of the songs - while enjoyable (I can't say I actively disliked a single song) - just didn't move me, and often lulled me into a state of being in the flow with the music so much that I stopped really listening to it. And that last grouping is where I get worried. Is there a song that actually had powerful lyrics about inequity in the world, that I just didn't end up connecting with? "Slave Driver", from *Catch a Fire* had some powerful lyrics, and the percussion and guitars drew me into the song and kept me there, allowing me to notice and feel the lyrics. So am I missing out if there was a song on *Rastaman Vibration* that is just as powerful, but the music lulled me into not paying attention as strongly? These are the questions that I've been struggling with all week.

These questions started a process where I was really analyzing the songs, and what made me like a song more or less, and then did some research. I started noticing that pretty much every Bob Marley song has a static element, and then elements that create a certain amount of dynamism. From what I researched, the static repetition is a core piece of reggae music, creating grooves that are purposefully hypnotic and meditative. Learning this set me free: I realized that this feature was somehow what made me like the music this week a lot, but also what made it flow right past me often. Like jazz, the repetitive percussion and bass is the base upon which the rest of the song is set. And, like my experience of jazz, this often gave songs a vibe that I really liked, but then wanted (needed?) something more to *keep* me plugged into the song beyond the first minute or so of a song. And this unlocked my self-understanding of what made the difference for me this week: what was most prominent in a song, the static aspect, or the dynamic one?

So what did I like? Across the board, the beats and grooves were great. My notes are littered with "digging this groove", "great beat", and "love the mood" about pretty much every song. Even the songs that eventually ended up flowing past me - where I experienced it more than listened to it - I almost always loved the feel of the song from the start, and even often noted that the percussion and bass really drove the song in a way that I liked. And the background vocalists - they could almost do no wrong. Whether they were harmonizing, doing a call and response with the lead vocals, or just providing background color, I have nothing but good things to say about the background vocalists on every song.

From album to album, there certainly was an evolution - later albums incorporated more/different instruments, and some albums were overall stronger than others. But the DNA remained the same, and if I were to go through each album and talk about everything that I liked and didn't like across the board, I feel like I'd be repeating myself constantly. So instead, I'm just going to focus on my favorite songs from each album.

*Catch a Fire* had two songs that stood out to me. The first was "Stir It Up", which had a great feel, and the lead and background vocals worked really well together. Every time the electric guitar came to the forefront, I was pulled right back into the song. For as much as I liked "Stir It Up", though, "No More Trouble" was my favorite song from the album; its sparse musical opening is distinctive (featuring some very effective keyboard and guitar playing), and then just before the 1-minute mark the rest of the music comes in and the song takes off. The emotion behind the vocals really worked for me, with simple yet powerful lyrics.

"Pass It On" worked for me on *Burnin'*, with its chill vibe and keyboard intro transitioning into the vocals and music. A further musical build-up around the 1.5-minute mark elevates the songs more, and throughout it provides a strong emotional experience through the music and vocal performance. The most interesting song for me, though, was "I Shot The Sheriff". I know this song *so well*, but I know it as an Eric Clapton song. Before this week, I had never heard the original. I was immediately struck by the chorus - and I didn't like it. I don't know if it was 35 years of familiarity with Clapton's version, but the falsetto for the chorus did not work for me. And it's a shame, because I *loved* the verses - hearing Bob Marley sing them has an authenticity that the Clapton version lacks, and made me understand why this was a song worth covering.

*Natty Dread* has a few songs that stuck out, with "Lively Up Yourself" and "Rebel Music (3 O'Clock Road Block)" being two that grabbed me quickly. "Lively Up Yourself" had a depth to that made the song feel bigger, and the more the saxophone and guitar appeared, the more I liked it. "Rebel Music" grabbed me with the harmonica, and kept me with the background vocals, more harmonica, and drums. The song was dripping with personality for me. But this album hinges on "No Woman, No Cry" for me. I feel like I've heard Bob Marley versions before, but this was the first time I really listened to it. And I've listened to the Fugees version dozens of times. Unlike with "I Shot The Sheriff", though, Marley's version is now my standard. Everything about the original is better. The emotion is so stark, the bass stands out so much, and (most of all) the use of the organ is amazing. The guitar coming in late adds even more to it. I went back and listened to the Fugees version afterwards, and realized that song had served its purpose and had its time; I'm all about the original now.

*Exodus* starts out strong and then finishes strong. Early on, we get "Guiltiness", bringing a great combo of keyboards and horns, and wonderful vocal combinations. "The Heathen" comes immediately next, and that guitar intro is hot... leading into vocals and the rest of the music coming in perfectly. This song has great depth, and there is a hidden rock song in the background featuring some amazing guitar work. And then the album closes out with a great combo, "Three Little Birds" and "One Love/People Get Ready". "Three Little Birds" sets a great vibe with the bass and percussion; the guitar and harmonies drive the song through with some great musical changes between the verses and the chorus. "One Love/People Get Ready" has some wonderful keyboard playing at the beginning, and since I love love, I love the message of the song. The background vocals and harmonies are really good throughout, and I really appreciated how the bass traveled around in the song and different percussion instruments would come and go throughout.

*Uprising* hit me late, with two versions of two songs: "Could You Be Loved" and "Redemption Song". Both versions of "Could You Be Loved" are really good, with a very distinctive opening. The guitar, then keyboards and guitar, and then the vocals come in. And while I love the music all the way through, the background vocals and harmonies are the hero of the song, and I'm here for all of it. And then we have "Redemption Song". The band version is good, but this song is all about the original stripped down version. The emotional vocals come through amazingly, backed by the acoustic guitar setting the mood perfectly.

There is a lot to like from this week, and there are a few songs I will come back to. Most of it felt like music to experience more than listen to, and I think I'm ok with feeling that way. I can't say that I'll come back to any of these albums as a whole, but there are a handful of Bob Marley songs that I would happily come back to at any point.

* Favorite Album: *Exodus* wins this one for me, just a bit over *Catch a Fire*. *Catch a Fire* was probably the more consistent album of the two for me, but I can't argue with the higher highs of *Exodus*.
* Favorite Song: Which emotional song do I pick? "Redemption Song" really does it for me, give me Bob Marley and an acoustic guitar any time. And with that said, it's still "No Woman, No Cry". The emotional performance and the organ put it over the top for me, for a song I already liked and now have an original version to like markedly even more.

Hopefully after a week of overthinking how I listen to music can be followed with a simpler one next week, where  Death Cab for Cutie is on deck.
