---
file: week16-TracyChapman.md
title: Tracy Chapman
date: 2025-11-14
order: 16
---

Let's just start off with this week's playlist:

- *Tracy Chapman* (1988)
- *Crossroads* (1989)
- *Matters of the Heart* (1992)
- *New Beginning* (1995)
- "Telling Stories" (*Telling Stories*, 2000)
- *Let It Rain* (2002)
- *Where You Live* (2005) <small>second listen only</small>

Not since the days of [Aimee Mann](https://barrylliumlabs.com/music/post.html?file=week4-AimeeMann.md) have I encountered such consistency from song to song, album to album. That's not to say that there isn't an evolution from song to song and album to album - because I'm sure that's there - but I don't know enough about her life, or her music, to say enough about that. But I can say that there was not a single album on the list this week that I didn't enjoy, and each album had multiple songs that I really liked.

*Tracy Chapman* starts out so strong with "Talkin' Bout a Revolution" and "Fast Car", giving us an immediate introduction to her rich, deep voice that is full of emotion and authenticity. Unbelievable first two songs from any album, let alone a debut album. Then you hit "Behind the Wall", a powerful a cappella piece about domestic violence that I barely have words for, it's so striking. "She's Got Her Ticket" has some amazing guitar sequences that made me think of Eric Clapton, "Why?" comes through full of meaning, and "If Not Now..." kept grabbing me with the tempo changes throughout the entire song.

I could continue saying something about every song on *Tracy Chapman* but then I'd have nothing new to say for any of the rest of her albums, so let's move on to *Crossroads*. The thing I began noticing in *Crossroads* was how she often manages to create a juxtaposition between her lyrics and music. In "Crossroads", her vocals and the music set a very chill vibe, while the lyrics are about standing her ground in the face of the world being against her. "Bridges" brings a very simplistic musical background that somehow works with her striking, rich vocal performance. The simplicity at the beginning of "Be Careful of My Heart" was almost entrancing - that simplicity being another thing that captured me throughout her catalog. Perhaps it's a side-effect of playing acoustically, but it feels honest, and consistently drew me in to her music. "Born to Fight" is almost jaunty in its musical mood, but the lyrics have a "stand your ground" feel to it. "This Time" was a favorite of mine, the violin and guitar pair so well, and when the song kicks in more halfway through, it's very powerful. And I can't not talk about "Subcity" - a song about our society not taking care of it's people, with the amazing line "Won't you please please give the President my honest regards for disregarding me". Sadly, this song is from 1989, and plays just as true today.

*Matters of the Heart* won me over listening to "So", where the guitar playing brought me back to listening to Jim Croce, perhaps my favorite acoustic guitar player of all time. "I Used to Be a Sailor" grabbed me emotionally, I connected with wanting to be moving, finding trouble with stillness. The simplistic beauty of her music shows up again in "If These Are the Things". There's something I can't quite express about how effective she is when her lyrics and voice express a sadness that somehow works with an upbeat musical backing. "Short Supply", on the other hand, seemed to have vocals and instrumentals that were more in accord with each other, and that really worked for me too.

While listening to *New Beginning*, my brain started to find a connection between Chapman's work and that of the members of boygenius a few weeks ago. The honesty and emotion in all of their work really shines through, and I enjoy making those connections in my head, even if I'm just imagining them 😀. In "Smoke and Ashes", both the guitar and piano work really stood out to me - as much as I love her lyrics, the song made me want even more of those pieces. I had the chorus of "Cold Feet" stuck in my head for half a day, and I can't even tell you why. "The Rape of the World" is another powerful song that I'm sad to say fits just as well in 2025 as it did in 1995. "Give Me One Reason" is the first Tracy Chapman song I ever heard, and will always be a favorite. And "Remember the Tin Man" manages to be both haunting and beautiful all at once.

But I can't talk about *New Beginning* without talking about two songs in particular: "At This Point in My Life" and "The Promise". And I can't talk about those songs without talking about my wife. I have an amazing and loving wife, and we've been through (and still are going through) a lot over the past almost 25 years. And because of her, I've listened to these songs multiple times, and I cannot make it through them without crying. "At This Point in My Life" is about trying, failing, getting back up again, and then trying to live out of love knowing you are a flawed human being who is doing their best and will still fail. And I've found a woman that sees all of this in me, accepts it in me, and loves me both in spite and because of these things. I'm the luckiest person I know, she's the biggest reason why, and this song makes me continually feel *all of this*.

And then there is "The Promise", coming right after "At This Point in My Life". It's like Tracy Chapman just doesn't even want me to have a chance to recover. Sometimes the world does what it can to find ways to drive itself between us. Sometimes life is just so busy that we have a hard time finding time for each other. Other times we lose sight of what is important and we don't focus enough on each other. And sometimes life just throws so much at us that it's difficult to focus on anything other than just being overwhelmed by life. I feel like the past few years have been a lot of that last category. But then there are the times we find our way back to each other. Sometimes it's a stolen hug in the middle of the day. Other times it's days/weeks of normalcy and calm. But no matter how long, it's those moments when I truly feel at home. And that's what "The Promise" evokes in me, those moments where I feel at home. I'm lucky enough to have my wife, someone who knows I get lost in my own world, get stuck in my head, and sometimes struggle to reconnect to myself and to her. But she always has a place in her heart for me, and I always have one for her. And I like to think that she knows that I always want us both to be in each other's hearts; and no matter what, I'll always come back there. I love you, Lauren, forever. Thank you for being you and for being with me ❤️

So... back to music, I guess... And at this point I'm going to lump the rest of this together. Not because it isn't good, but because 1) I'll just be repeating many of the things I've already said, and 2) the rest of it just can't compete with the songs I just talked about. I really liked "Telling Stories", it had great lyrics, and I loved the use of the organ. *Let It Rain* and *Where You Live* each had some more great examples of juxtaposition between the music and vocals ("Let It Rain", "Almost", "Don't Dwell"), and some other songs that made great use of tempo shifts ("Hard Wired", "3000 Miles"). The music is all excellent, with "In The Dark" having a really haunting-yet-beautiful vibe to it, "Broken" having some excellent guitar work, "Love's Proof" and "Be and Be Not Afraid" having some great instrumental work from start to end.

To sum things up, if you like someone who has mastery over showing emotion and honesty in her voice; who writes meaningful lyrics; plays guitar in a way that makes me wish I knew how to play guitar; can create music that works whether the vocals and music are in accord or in juxtaposition with each other; and can lead you around in a song by mixing up tempo changes to move you in and out of a song along with her, then you will most likely like Tracy Chapman. And if you don't like those things, I don't know what to tell you.

- Favorite album: I want to heap tons of praise on *Tracy Chapman*, it's a great album, on top of being an amazing debut album. But man, *New Beginning* just wins this for me in the emotional journey it takes me on. And that is in large part to...
- Favorite song: I get to cheat, because I make the rules: the back-to-back combo of "At This Point in My Life" and "The Promise" win for me. There are so many songs of hers that I really loved, from "Fast Car" to "This Time", to "Give Me One Reason" to "Telling Stories", that almost every album had a candidate for this. But I didn't write multiple paragraphs about "At This Point in My Life" and "The Promise" to have them not be my favorite.

And next week, the tough job of following this week up goes to Wilco
