---
file: week33-Prince.md
title: Prince
date: 2026-03-13
order: 33
---

Yes, of course I've heard Prince before this week. But, like with the Rolling Stones, it's more of a "I've heard a few songs, but I want to know more" kind of deal - because Prince lives in the musical lexicon, and his cultural impact (from what I remember from being a kid in the 80s) was huge. Oh, and there's [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6SFNW5F8K9Y). So with all that, I dove into the following playlist:

* *Dirty Mind* (1980)
* *Controversy* (1981)
* *1999* (1982)
* *Purple Rain* (1984)
* *Parade* (1986) <small>second playthrough only</small>
* *Sign O' the Times* (1987)

Right off the bat in *Dirty Mind*, I was very impressed with the music. And then I was more impressed when I started looking at the credits for each song, and every song had "Prince: Lead vocals, **All Instruments**". And this isn't like a "he played the guitar *and* the tambourine" kind of thing. He was playing multiple guitars, piano, synths, bass guitar, drums, and probably countless others... and doing them all *very well*. As someone who can barely look at a piano correctly, I find this infinitely amazing. The entire album was full of music I liked, with great beats, musical transitions, and buildups. A real highlight for me was "Uptown", to which I wrote "Oh hell yeah" in my notes to the beginning of the song. In addition to some killer guitar playing and drumming, this was one of his better examples of vocal range on the album as well.

And then we come to *Controversy*, and I need to talk about something. A few weeks back, I complained about Leonard Cohen making an entire album about sex. My exact words were: “… when you make an entire album about it, you kinda end up sounding a bit creepy”. Now I've come to Prince, who seemingly spent an entire career writing songs and albums about sex, and for as much as *Dirty Mind* had a few songs on the topic, *Controversy* was like "hold my beer". I did an exhaustive check, and of the 8 songs on the album, 13 are about sex. I will give Prince one major point here, though - when he does this, he makes a song that still has great music. And I get it - the album was called *Controversy* for a reason; Prince was purposely being provocative and "in your face" while attacking cultural masculinity and gender norms as a whole. But I'll tell you what - lyrically, most of these songs were not for me. Did I want a song where Prince pretends to have an orgasm for four minutes? No. But did I need that song? Also no. Ah, but did I like that song? Well, most of it before the last four minutes, yes. The first four minutes of "Do Me, Baby", before the aforementioned final four minutes, had strong vocals and a sparse keyboard, guitar, and drums arrangement that I really liked. And then the rest of it happened. I didn't like it, and it made me mad that the song ruined itself for me. And that's pretty much how I feel about this album in its entirety - there were parts I really liked (almost all were the music), and then parts of a song or entire songs just turned me off of it.

From this point on, at least, the rest of the albums could have the tagline "Prince: now with *less* sex". Oh, but not none, just less. *1999* starts off with two bangers, "1999" and "Little Red Corvette". Because I have been alive for the past several decades, I, of course, was aware of "1999", as it was used in countless movies and TV shows throughout the years - and it was played once or twice in the year 1999. But it's a really good song. And full credit to Jill Jones and Lisa Coleman for their great singing throughout, especially in the iconic line "I was dreamin' when I wrote this". The vocals in the whole song are great, the drums are excellent, the keyboards are fantastic, and the guitar is epic. And with that said, I also don't want to think about a song written 44 years ago, that was written about a year that happened 27 years ago now 😬

Before moving on, I need to talk about a song from my childhood. I can't tell you how many times I heard this song, but it was everywhere. It had great music and a catchy chorus where they would sing "Baaaaby come back". Why do I bring this song up? Because that song is called "Little Red Corvette", and I learned that *this week*. And they were not saying "Baaaaby come back", they were singing "Little Red Corvette", but 3-10 year old me had no damn clue what they were saying, so my mind autofilled in the lyrics. And I regret nothing, because I got to re-love a song this week without having amnesia. This song is legit. From the percussion and keyboards intro, to some great harmonies, amazing guitar playing everywhere, and the musical buildup in each verse leading up to that iconic "~Baaaaby come back~ Little Red Corvette" chorus, it's just all so good.

The album isn't just about two songs, though. Every song had something, whether it was Prince playing the piano, Prince playing the guitar, Prince singing multiple vocal tracks at the same time, Prince playing the drums... every song had something. If you cut out the weird 3 minutes in the middle of "Lady Cab Driver", I would really like that whole song. But "Free" really pulls the whole thing off. Strong-yet-understated emotional vocals, great keyboard playing, really good background vocals, and a fantastic moment around the 1-minute mark where the drums and guitar kick in - this song builds together well from start to finish.

*Purple Rain* is up next, and this album did not disappoint after *1999*. There were a few songs that didn't really work for me, but outside of those, this album really killed it. The strings section is so damn good in "Take Me with U", with background vocals and harmonies for days. The drums/synth/keyboard opening to "The Beautiful Ones" is great, and it shifts well musically from moment-to-moment within the song - and then ends with some A++++ tier guitar at the end. And then, of course, comes "When Doves Cry". The guitar opening is amazing, and then the piano comes in and makes the song even better. The drums and synth work well together, and then the song decides to have some more off-the-charts guitar playing and some amazing synth keyboard playing to end the song on. Tack on that this might be his best vocal performance, and yes, this is a legit great song.

And finally, the album ends with the titular "Purple Rain". Starting with a nice intro of guitar leading into the drums and vocals, everything is wonderfully restrained early on, as the song then builds bigger and bigger as it goes on. The strings are fantastic, and every time I hear them they take it from a good song to a great song. The entire tone of the song is wonderfully emotional - and even though it goes on for a little long, the amazing music and vocals through most of it makes the song so worth it despite the last 1.5 minutes feeling like they were tacked on late.

Unlike *Purple Rain*, I can't say that *Parade* did not disappoint. It did disappoint: it disappointed me. I spent the first half of the album thinking "this isn't what I want", despite a few nice vocal or musical moments here and there. But the album does pick up starting with "Venus de Milo" - a song with no lyrics (that I'm 100% sure is still *somehow* about sex). It's beautiful: the strings, piano, and horns really make a wonderful melody. I know "Kiss" is supposed to be the hit song from the album, and parts of it were really good. I liked the intro, and the guitar and keyboards are really good in it. And I genuinely like how the chorus sounds with the backing vocals. But I feel like the rest of the song left me waiting to get back to the chorus... and then the vocals go straight off the rails at the end of the song. But, overall, the second half of the album fares much better than the first, ending on an emotional and moving "Sometimes It Snows in April" (a song that never lived in the northern midwest, where it *always* snows in April). The keyboard and guitar worked beautifully together, and the harmonies in the chorus sounded great. And hey, if nothing else, Prince can look at this album and continue to point out how he was using "U" instead of "You" well before texting was a thing.

The "I liked the second half more than the first" trend continues into *Sign O' The Times*. While I wanted a little more dynamism from "Sign O' The Times", it's still a strong lyrical song with emotional vocals. But disc 1 didn't do much else for me. Again, there were great musical moments everywhere - Prince is still playing 27 different instruments amazingly well throughout every song - but weird choices threw me out of most songs (like the *whoosh* sound that flat out ruins "Starfish and Coffee" for me, an otherwise above average song). "Forever In My Life" almost escapes this fate, though, with some strong layered vocals (Prince often sang multiple vocal tracks, and did so well) - but I found myself wishing the song was a little less simple musically than it was. "Slow Love" might be the only other song to not fall victim, the mood of the song is great, and the horns are fantastic.

Disc 2 picks up after a few songs, though. "Strange Relationship" has a really great beat and equally good vocals, and a great musical kick whenever the chorus hits. If "I Could Never Take The Place Of Your Man" was a 4-minute song, I would really like it... so let's just pretend it's not longer than that. "The Cross" is really good, with the slight complaint that the bass drum is just too prominent in much of the song. But even with that, the vocals are powerful, and the rest of the music is great - especially with the kick at the 2:30-mark, which is outright fantastic. The album doesn't live up to the highs of *1999* and *Purple Rain*, but I can at least understand why people liked it so much, as Prince hops across genres from funk, to soul, to pop, to political commentary - there almost is something for everyone.

I don't think there is any denying that Prince is one of the most talented musicians of all time, and that was on full display this week for me. After a week where I was diving deep into lyrics last week, it was a bit of a shock to listen to so many songs this week where the lyrics pushed me away - but that still didn't ruin the whole week for me. I can't say that I love Prince, and I can't say that I'm going to dive back into his music at any point; I can say that I like Prince, appreciate his talent, and genuinely love several of his songs, though. He was an impressive musician, without a doubt, and I'm glad that I got to experience more of that.

* Favorite Album: *Purple Rain* takes this over *1999*, as it felt like the most solid album to me. Even the few songs I bounced off of a bit had some things I really liked, and its hit rate was just a bit higher than *1999* for me.
* Favorite Song: A handful of songs really sat above the others this week, and at the top of this for me is "When Doves Cry". It's just such a wonderful vocal performance, and showcases peak guitar and keyboard playing - it's impossible for me (at least in this moment) to not take it over the other great songs in his discography.

Next up, the Grateful Dead - but for now, I'm off to [play some basketball](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NBeT903WYJo).
