---
file: week27-DavidBowie.md
title: David Bowie
date: 2026-01-30
order: 27
---

David Bowie has been on my radar for most of my life. I’ve seen Labyrinth, I’ve seen Zoolander. He’s half of one of my favorite songs of all time in [Under Pressure](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a01QQZyl-_I). I’m aware of his amazing work with [Ricky Gervais](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a7vvclrK2HQ). And now, after a week of being immersed in his work, I’m disappointed… disappointed that I haven’t been listening to him this whole time. He is so good. So damn good. \*Grabs universe by the shoulders and shakes it\* Why did no one tell me about this before!

* "Space Oddity" (1969) <small>second playthrough only</small>
* "The Man Who Sold the World" (1970)
* *Hunky Dory* (1971) <small>second playthrough only</small>
* *The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars* (1972)
* *Aladdin Sane* (1973)
* "Rebel Rebel" (1974) <small>second playthrough only</small>
* *Station to Station* (1976)
* *Low* (1977)
* *"Heroes"* (1977)
* *Scary Monsters (and Super Creeps)* (1980) <small>second playthrough only</small>
* *Blackstar* (2016) <small>second playthrough only</small>

Ok, ok - so the universe has been telling me, [I’m the problem](https://tenor.com/view/its-me-hi-im-the-problem-its-me-taylor-swift-anti-hero-midnights-hi-gif-13029647805586693511). As my wife will attest to, I don’t do so well with subtle, even when what I consider to be subtle everyone else in the world would call "obvious".

Let's start with the singles. "Space Oddity" - a song that I learned isn't called "Major Tom" is a song that I've heard many times before and love. The vibe is great, and I love how the song starts out slow and then the tempo shifts about 1.5 minutes in. The music is great, and the vocals are fantastic, especially where the vocals are layered on top of each other. Again, how did I not start listening to Bowie decades ago?

Then we come to "The Man Who Sold the World". [Nirvana's cover](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OgeR2oqZGTs) of this song is a top-5 Nirvana song for me, and I knew it was a Bowie song (because they tell the audience that at the end of the performance). After hearing Bowie's version, I think I still prefer Nirvana's version, but I really like Bowie's as well. The arrangement is really good, the acoustic guitar is perfect. That moment (in both versions) when we go from just the guitar playing to the bass and drums coming in is one of my favorite musical moments ever. Again, what is wrong with past me?!

Finally, we have "Rebel Rebel", a song I had not heard before. The guitar intro, leading into the drums, then the background vocals, and finally the lead vocals is really catchy. Somehow this song both felt like a Bowie song, but also reminded me a lot of The Rolling Stones, something I surely won't complain about.

Let's get into the albums. It was not lost on me that Bowie has five albums on *Rolling Stone's* latest top 500 albums of all time list (again, why, me?). *Hunky Dory* is one of those, and while I'm laying the regret on thick, I also regret not listening to this album until my second pass. For starters, amazing piano playing everywhere. *Changes* is full of beautiful piano playing. "Oh! You Pretty Things" starts out with a simplistic arrangement of piano and vocals, until the song takes off at the 1.5-minute mark - and then masterfully transitions in and out of tempo changes. "Life on Mars?" blew me away, sucking me in with the piano and vocals. Once the rest of the instruments kick in, the entire mood of the song is epic, with fantastic piano playing throughout and the guitar complementing it really well between verses.

But it's not all about the piano; Quicksand starts with a simple guitar and vocals arrangement that I loved, and then adds on piano, drums, and strings with great transitions and a knockout arrangment of all the instruments. "Song for Bob Dylan" features high highs on the electric guitar, and the acoustic guitar isn't too far behind. And across every song, the vocals are wonderfully delivered full of emotion that is complemented so well by the music. Across the board the vocals are fantastic, Bowie having such a unique voice with depth and range.

Honestly, I could say more... but I have seven more albums to cover here 😃

Next up, is *The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars* (which I will just call *Ziggy Stardust* henceforth). Amazing piano work? Check. Fantastic guitar playing? Uh huh. Powerful vocals? You betcha! All the great things from *Hunky Dory*, but with different songs (I guess that's how albums often work...). And, much like *Hunky Dory*, I could go on and on about this sci-fi story of an album, but I'll focus on two songs, even though I want to talk about almost all of them. The first is "Starman", another song I'd heard before. And I adore this song. From the acoustic guitar, to the electric guitar in the middle, to the drums all the time, the strings section, to the mellotron, this song gets it. I first learned about the mellotron while listening to The Rolling Stones a few weeks ago - and now I really know about it, because this song has shown me mastery of it. The music throughout the song is great - but the strings and mellotron dug their way into my bones. Bowie sang that the Starman thought he'd blow our minds... too late, Bowie, you already did it.

The second song on this album I want - no, need - to talk about is "Rock 'n' Roll Suicide". I was having a bad day when I first listened to this song, and the acoustic guitar intro to this song brings us back to a place we haven't visited in a month or so: songs that make Brett cry. It just sounded so beautiful. A second listening held up, the guitar/vocals combo is simply striking, and it struck me to the core. At about the 1:15 mark, the horns and drums kick in, and the song somehow manages to get even better. They lyrics are great, the vocal delivery is even better. The slight pause before every time Bowie sings "You're not alone" is masterful and effective in its arrangement. The song builds up to be huge near the end, and everything about all of it is great.

On my first listen of *Aladdin Sane*, I had a moment of profound moment of clarity. While listening to the fantastic song "Time", I realized that listening to Bowie was evoking some of the same feelings I have when I listen to Queen. The way the instruments meld together, the way the vocals evoke emotion, and some quantity I can't really define - a bigness, an epicness, some out of this world mood - all of it is *that thing* that I feel when I listen to Queen. And that's high praise from me, as Queen is my all-time favorite band.

So, of course I have to start off my highlights of this album with "Time". We start with just piano, and then the vocals come in and pair with it so well. And then, 45 seconds in, we add in more instruments and the song elevates. Then the tempo shifts in the third minute, and the guitar and piano complement each other to the point they almost meld. The guitar at this point is next level. And at no point do the vocals let the song down, all of it feels epic.

The rest of the album doesn't disappoint, either. From the album starting with the late tempo shift in "Watch That Man" with piano/drums/saxophone to the album ending with "Lady Grinning Soul" starting out with some great piano playing and masterfully pausing before several of the verses - leaving me anxiously waiting (in a good way) for the next verse to start, every song has something great in it. One more song I'll highlight is "The Jean Genie". It gave me The Rolling Stones vibes, especially with the harmonica killing it. I loved the intro, which was somewhat reminiscent of The Doors' "Roadhouse Blues". My notes simply say "the intro is my jam".

Next station on this trip is *Station to Station*. Every song, again, is great. Objectively 😃. For starters, I'll let you travel with me on my journey through the title track:

> The song starts out, and there are train sounds. And I’m like "why are you making me listen to a train, David Bowie?". Then, after a minute and a half, some drums start, along with some guitar and some other instruments, and I start to get intrigued. Things slowly build up, and finally the vocals start and the mood of the song changes completely. 10 seconds later, the music kicks in a little more, and I’m thinking "ok, this song is taking me somewhere, I’m along for the ride". And then, at the 5.5-minute mark, the piano starts up, the drums kick in more, and everything goes to a new level: and from that point on, I’m just sucked into the song more and more, and I'm left thinking "Thank you, David Bowie, for the train that started me on this journey".

While I loved "Station to Station", it's not alone as a tremendous song on this album. "Word on a Wing" is powerful, with the piano, drums, and vocals providing a strong emotional mood (and the guitar elevating everything from the background). With the subdued, striking vocals, the song is beautiful and draws me in. Add in learning that Bowie wrote this in the depths of struggling with a cocaine addiction and emotional instability, and the song feels even more powerful.

Bowie's cover of "Wild Is the Wind" closes out the album, and it too is striking in its simplicity. Following the energy of "Stay", the music here is stripped down, and focuses on Bowie's vocals, where he ranges from quiet restraint to passionate intensity, exposing his emotional vulnerability with where he was at that point in his life. Powerful song to end a powerful album.

I'm going to talk about *Low* and *"Heroes"* together here, for the reason that the second half of each album is essentially instrumental tracks. And most of all, that's not what I was looking for. That's not to say that I didn't like some of those tracks - they just paled in comparison to everything else I listened to from Bowie. They also, as 2/3 of Bowie's Berlin trilogy, contain *a lot* of synthesizer work. Sometimes I really liked the synths, and other times I felt them distracting. *Low* is the stronger album of the two for me, with *"Heroes"* having less that I was really drawn to (the title track being the exception). The first half of *Low* has a lot of great music in it, from the guitar/piano/farfisa in "What in the World" to the bass/drums/guitars during the intro to "Sound and Vision" and the synth later in the song.

*Scary Monsters (and Super Creeps)* got better for me as I went from start to finish, and a lot of it felt like a return back to the things I adored in his earlier albums (while still evolving and bringing in things from the Berlin trilogy). The album peaks in the middle for me - "Teenage Wildlife" grabbed me instantly with its drums/guitar/piano intro. The vocals come in strong, and everything complements everything else. This song, more than any other song on the album, felt like vintage early Bowie to me. "Because You're Young" had another great intro, with the guitar and the synth building up to the addition of drums, and then another guitar. Everything works in this song for me musically. And it was fun to hear Major Tom come back again.

And, finally, we come to the last album, "Blackstar" - literally Bowie's last album, written when he knew he was dying and released two days before his death. "✩" opens up the album with some really strong percussion and some great sax, and goes on journey that feels like an artistic farewell. It kicks off an album that builds and builds, with the final two tracks knocking it out of the park for me. "Dollar Days" again harkened back to early Bowie, with the piano and sax starting creating a nice subdued intro, and then the drums/bass/guitars join in - and the acoustic guitar really adds to the feel of the song. "I Can't Give Everything Away" follows with its own great intro, with a harmonica, keyboards, and percussion starting it off, and a great beat the entire way through. But most fitting, this song, album, and career ends with a stellar emotional vocal performance.

So, yes, a part of me feels like I've wasted years not listening to Bowie. And yet, I love the fact that at 46 years old, I've given myself the gift of discovering this new old music, and having him vault up there with some of my favorite artists of all time. What a wonderful gift to give myself.

* Favorite Album: After my first playthrough, I was 100% sure this would be *Ziggy Stardust*. Part of me feels like if you asked me after a few more listens, the answer would be *Hunky Dory*. After my second playthrough *Station to Station* really rose for me. But, I keep coming back to *Ziggy Stardust*. It's the one I've recommended to a few people in my family, and it's the first album I will revisit.
* Favorite Song: When I take my notes, I put a ⭐️ next to songs that really strike me, that upon listening to it I feel like it is in the race to be my fav. I had more stars this week than any previous week, probably more than in several weeks if you combined them. My point is that I really loved a lot of songs this week. And that doesn't even count "The Man Who Sold the World", which didn't get a star *only* because I prefer Nirvana's version. And almost every album had at least one song that I felt this way about - a tribute to how great Bowie was across his entire career. "Space Oddity", "Life on Mars?", "Starman", "Rock 'n' Roll Suicide", "Time", and "Word on a Wing" made the first cut, and I honestly am still struggling to pick. So I'll go with my earworm - I have not been able to get the chorus of "Starman" out of my head all week.

After an amazing and very enjoyable week, I'm off to dive into Leonard Cohen. Until then, let all the children boogie.
