---
file: week51-Muse.md
title: Muse
date: 2026-07-17
order: 51
---

What if Radiohead and Queen had a baby (and the Deftones were the nanny)?

* *Showbiz* (1999)
* *Origin of Symmetry* (2001)
* *Absolution* (2003)
* *Black Holes and Revelations* (2006)
* *The Resistance* (2009)
* "Madness" (2012)

It didn't take long for me to think I was going to enjoy this week, as it only took a few songs for me to feel all-in on Muse. I was getting huge Radiohead vibes (and not just from the vocal similarities), and they were hitting a lot of things I really liked: bass-forward arrangements, great beats, attention-catching transitions between parts of a song, and every member of the band had mastery of their instrument. I don't think there is a bad song on *Showbiz*, and even with that high quality overall, a few songs still managed to stand out above the rest for me. "Cave" has bass, piano, drums, and guitar that are all firing hard - and that music works great with a powerful vocal performance. The piano knits into everything else; then near the end the song transitions into a simple, piano-led piece - only to build back up to its musically powerful self. Everything is strong in "Cave", which gives the song a palpable depth. A few songs later we get "Unintended" - which is a real change of pace from the rest of the album. It starts out with just a guitar and faint string (from a mellotron) backing up a vulnerable vocal performance. About a minute into the song, the bass comes in, and the arrangement keeps filling out from there with drums and a Hammond organ joining in. And it's that organ that took me from liking the song to being entranced by it. It just added an unexpected layer to what was already a beautiful composition.

*Origin of Symmetry* was my "low point" of the week - which is great, because I overall liked the album. The one negative thing I kept finding was that in several songs, there were moments when there felt like there was just too much going on. Sometimes the music would overpower the vocals, other times the large variety of instruments would just not quite come together enough for me, and it left me feeling some dissonance about the music. And yet, it still brings some quality songs - with "Bliss", "Plug In Baby" standing out a bit early for me, and the album closing well with "Screenager", "Darkshines", and "Megalomania" - with "Darkshines" being my favorite song on the album. The guitar and bass intro immediately grabbed my attention, leading into a restrained-yet-strong vocal performance. And then the keyboards come in - discordant in a good way - and the music in the chorus is killer as everything ramps up. That transition into the chorus was "stop whatever I'm doing" good every time.

*Absolution* not only brings things back up, it takes things to a whole new level - this album does no wrong. The first half of the album rivals any album I've listened to all year - six songs in (not counting "Intro" and "Interlude", which are not *really* songs), every song was my favorite song. Fantastic beats, keyboards killing it everywhere, vocal performances rising and falling through four octaves, and perfect synth usage in song after song after song. At the end of "Time is Running Out", "Sing For Absolution", "Stockholm Syndrome", and "Falling Away with You", I was thinking "that's definitely my favorite song" every time. And then a few songs later "Butterflies & Hurricanes" comes along. The musical arrangement is slowly building itself up over the first 1:20, and then... the keyboards come in and that moment absolutely slaps. I mean, the music was already good; guitar and bass, background vocals, with a strings orchestra coming in, and then drums - but that moment when the keyboards come in - that moment floors me. The vocal performance kicks into overdrive, and the music is right there with it. The energy spikes, the beat takes off, and despite how much is going on, *everything* works together. The song later transitions into a keyboards/orchestra-led piece, with a quiet beauty to it - and it somehow fits in the middle of a rock song as well as it would work in a ballet at that point. Then, in the last minute, it reclaims its full energy - and the song masterfully weaves its way through its full journey. The best song on a song full of best songs.

How does anyone follow up *Absolution*? Thankfully, it doesn't matter how anyone does it, because Muse does it extremely well. *Black Holes and Revelations* isn't quite up to *Absolution*'s level - but it's damn near close. It doesn't have the "every song is amazing" feel to it, but the songs I liked the most, I somehow liked *even more* than the songs from *Absolution*. "Starlight" is an early favorite on the album, the music rises and falls so well, and the vocal performance is right there with the music every step of the way (his falsetto is on prime display). It feels like there are 3-4 entirely different levels, and it transitions effortlessly between each of them.

Let's take a step back to talk about lyrics. I found myself looking at the lyrics on many songs this week, because I would hear something that intrigued me time and time again. It was often something intriguing - the lyrics were not grabbing me and making me love the song on a significantly deeper level in an Aimee Mann/Tracy Chapman kind of way, but the lyrics were still one more level that made me appreciate many Muse songs. And then we get to "Invincible". The drums/keyboards/synth arrangement has a great feel to it, and the vocal performance shines on top of it as it gains power through the verses. The guitar coming in for the chorus adds some depth, but it's when the bass comes in around the middle of the song that the music fully comes alive for me. The song builds upon itself so well from start to finish. But it's the lyrics that really bring this song home for me. As we all know by now, I love love. And this song speaks to me so much - through all the hard times (that happen more than anyone would like), no matter what, I'm lucky enough to be with someone that pulls through those moments together with me. The lyrics frame those moments, those feelings, so well.

And the album's not done! "City of Delusion", "Hoodoo", and "Knights of Cydonia" are a tour de force of musical composition. "City of Delusion" feels huge - a strong vocal performance combined with the orchestra and the band is spectacular at its peaks. "Hoodoo" transforms itself, starting almost as a mariachi song, moving into a quiet guitar-and-vocals song... and then the orchestra comes in, building up to the keyboards and drums coming in, and we again have this huge, full song. At this point I'm feeling the Queen connection in full, as the song is almost operatic. And then, finally, "Knights of Cydonia" starts out really weird for a few seconds - and takes a minute to build up through a guitar/drums/bass intro. It's when the synth and the trumpet come in, though, that this song earns its place in this composition trio. Is there too much going on? Almost - and yet it all works together. If Freddie Mercury had come in singing about Flash, I wouldn't have been shocked, the song has that sort of feel. And then, halfway through, we get a "Bohemian Rhapsody"-esque vocal moment with everyone singing as if they are a choir (and possibly the lead vocalist layering his own vocals), and the music swells up behind it, layer stacking upon layer. The song has an epic feel to it, as the bass and guitar crush it behind the vocals.

*The Resistance*, more than any other album this week, rose in my appreciation with a second listen. The album starts strong, and then ends strong - with a dip in the middle that isn't bad, but just isn't as strong. "Uprising" is the one song I recognized, having heard it before but I had no idea it was a Muse song. The vocal performance really drives the song, his control is on point, even as the power builds - and the synth is a perfect complement to that vocal performance. "Resistance" starts out with a haunting mood that is super effective - and then the keyboards and drums join. By the time the vocals start and the music kicks in more, I'm hooked. The guitar and the background vocals come in, and as the song keeps going, I'm smiling like an idiot because everything is *just so damn good*. Add in the lyrics, which once again I love - and the moment when he sings "Love is our resistance" and the music goes up one more notch - my notes just say "that chorus buildup gets me both times - and shit, is this my favorite song?" (Is it? we'll see in a bit!).

"United States of Eurasia (+Collateral Damage)" has a moment right after the minute mark - following a great early mood with the orchestra, piano, and vulnerable vocals - when the music builds up and here I am smiling again because good music just makes me happy. And it just feels like Queen at that moment - but not in an imitation way; just the perfect execution of that musical and vocal rise. The rest of the song is defined by a marvelous combination of bass, piano, and the orchestra. Another song on the very long list of possible favorite songs this week.

And then the album comes to a close with "Exogenesis: Symphony Pt. 1 (Overture)", "Exogenesis: Symphony Pt. 2 (Cross-pollination)", and "Exogenesis: Symphony Pt. 3 (Redemption)", and if the last album ended in a tour de force of musical composition, then this album ends in a tour de force plus grande. "Overture" builds up nicely, and by itself it feels cinematic at times, like we are being introduced to a sweeping new world in a film. But what it's really doing is setting us up for the rest of the symphony. The piano is beautiful with the strings early in "Cross-pollination", and there is this moment I loved where the orchestra drops out for just a moment - only to come back in with the vocals. Then the song one-ups itself halfway through with a powerful moment when the drums/bass/guitar come through, giving the song a new life with all of the music working exceptionally well together. Finally, part 2 settles back into the orchestra and piano arrangement from the start. As we enter "Redemption", we have a gorgeous piano and orchestra arrangement - with the cellos coming in more after a minute, blending right in with the piano. At the end of the second minute, the music starts to build up with percussion/bass/guitar coming in, and the piano ramps up - leading into a grand vocal performance. The vocals almost meld with the strings at times, they are so in sync with each other. The entire piece settles back into the beautiful piano and orchestra arrangement, and every stage of part 3 is legitimately moving.

Ending the week is "Madness". I was mixed on this song because it was so synth-heavy, but all the good things about the song overshadow that (and, on second listen, I ended up liking the synth more). The harmonies are tight, and the beat is very catchy. The final third really lands, and brings the song home. It's not the force that many of the other songs from this week are, but still a very enjoyable song.

I've had a good run of weeks here lately, and this week may have topped them all. And I don't say that lightly, given how much I loved Otis Redding a few weeks ago. There's something special about a band that pulls together so many of my favorite things — the atmosphere and vocal feel of Radiohead, the bass-forward intensity of the Deftones, and the grandeur and theatricality of Queen, my favorite band of all time. Album after album, song after song, I could feel the music helping me feel more alive.

* Favorite album: In a week of legitimately great albums, it's *Absolution*. This was one of my favorite albums of *the year*, let alone the week. And it speaks volumes about Muse that they had two other albums that were just a tick behind *Absolution* in how much I enjoyed them. *Absolution* had unparalleled consistency, with no real drop at any point, it speaks volumes that my notes say "Weakest song on the album and yet still a really good, strong song" at one point.
* Favorite song: This was almost "Invincible", but as hinted at earlier, "Resistance" comes up top because it does all the things I loved about "Invincible" and *also* has a phenomenal composition to it, and has my favorite musical moment of any other song this week, those moments when the chorus builds up.

And it comes to this - next week, the final week of my challenge, brings us St. Vincent.
