---
file: week29-Run-DMC.md
title: Run-DMC
date: 2026-02-13
order: 29
---

It was the fall of 2001. My now-wife and I proposed to each other, and when she proposed, she also surprised me with tickets to an Aerosmith concert that day (one of my favorite bands of all time). We drove four hours… to find out the concert was cancelled. So we had some decent Chinese food and drove home.

Fast forward to the summer of 2002, and our tickets were exchanged to a new (closer) Aerosmith concert - this time with Kid Rock and Run-DMC. As the concert was ending, Aerosmith came back out for one more song - but they didn’t just come out alone. All three artists came out together and performed "Walk This Way". To this day, it is easily the most amazing live music performance I’ve ever seen.

And yet, I still didn’t start listening to Run-DMC until this week.

* *Run-D.M.C.* (1984)
* *King of Rock* (1985) <small>second playthrough only</small>
* *Raising Hell* (1986)
* *Tougher Than Leather* (1988)
* *Down with the King* (1993)

It’s weeks like this where I start to wonder how I never really found an artist until now. And then I think about the fact that now I have access to streaming music and more artists than I could listen to in ten lifetimes. Because I’m an old, when I was a kid, I only had access to whatever my parents listened to, and then eventually a handful of artists my friends were into.

And even though I never really heard much Run-DMC, it struck me this week that I’ve still heard them, just indirectly. Every Fresh Prince/Will Smith, MC Hammer, Vanilla Ice, Beastie Boys, and Linkin Park song I listened to through the years wouldn’t exist without Run-DMC. The Bloodhound Gang covered "It’s Tricky", and I now know that I’ve heard many songs that sampled Run-DMC through the years. So I’ve been listening to them for decades, I just haven’t been listening to *them*.

Right off the bat with "Run-D.M.C.", I was digging their beats. It reminded me a lot of the late 80s/early 90s rap I grew up with. What I did not expect was the guitar kicking in on songs like "Rock Box". I was not expecting true rock music to live inside of these songs, and it wasn’t "just ok", it was always *really* good. And this is on top of something that runs through all of their songs: Run and D.M.C. are excellent rappers, and Jam-Master Jay is very good at mixing; not a single song went by on this first album where I didn't note loving the beat. Whether it was the drum machine loops on songs like "It's Like That", the turntable scratches in "Jam-Master Jay", or the synth in "It's Like That" and "30 Days", Jam-Master Jay set the tone for every song. The rapping is great in every song, and especially shines in songs like "It's Like That" when both Run and DMC are rapping at the same time, and with great lyrics like "Wake Up".

*King of Rock* brings everything to the table that *Run-D.M.C.* does, even if it doesn't quite live up to the standard set by the debut album. "King of Rock" has a moment where the guitar comes in early that is fantastic, and the synth around the 2-minute mark is stellar. The guitar/bass guitar work really shines in "Jam-Master Jammin'", "Can You Rock It Like This", and "You're Blind". Once again, the rapping and beat are really good in every song - I can't say enough about both of those things through every album I listened to.

*Raising Hell* really brings things to a new level. The album nails it, starting in with four killer songs in "Peter Piper", "It's Tricky", "My Adidas", and "Walk This Way". I could go on for paragraphs about those four songs alone, and the album still offers great song after great song right through the end. "Raising Hell" in particular shines late in the album, combining fantastic rapping, excellent turntable work, an awesome beat, and guitar/bass guitar work that really elevates the song. And yet, for as great as this whole album is, I have to go back to the start. "Peter Piper" is insanely catchy, the sampled chimes and bells that run throughout, combined with turntable scratches and drum machine loops creating a fantastic rhythm and feel to the song. I feel like I've heard this sampled an endless number of times, even though I can't quite put my finger on where. "It's Tricky" does an amazing job of working the guitar riff from "My Sharona" into the music, and the beat complements some next-level rapping. And then there is "Walk This Way". I love the original version of this song, and I love the Aerosmith/Run-DMC collaboration. When Run and DMC are finishing each other's lines, the song elevates beyond its original framework. And I can't say enough about Joe Perry on the guitar, he absolutely crushes it from start to finish. In a song setup for me to love it, it somehow still exceeds expectations.

How does a group follow up an album like this? In Run-DMC's case, they follow it up well. *Tougher Than Leather* doesn't waste time, with "Run's House" and "Mary, Mary" providing infectious beats. "Run's House" has some really fun call/response rapping, and one of the best beats of the album. "Mary, Mary" features the guitar really well, and has some great turntable work (that gets even better in the next song, "They Call Us Run-D.M.C."). "Radio Station" really grabbed me with its rhyme scheme and lyrics. Late in the album, I audibly said "Whoooo" when the guitar comes in a few seconds into "Miss Elaine", it caught me off guard in the best kind of way. With a killer beat, excellent rapping, and amazing guitar playing, this was easily one of my favorite songs on the album. And yet, the album peaks in the middle with "Papa Crazy" and "Tougher Than Leather". All throughout "Papa Crazy", the fantastic rapping is elevated by wonderful moments of horns and piano in the background. And "Tougher Than Leather" has some of the best rock aspects of any song I listened to this week. The rapping is fantastic, but the star is the guitar - which is legit awesome. This song flat out gets it, and it gets into my bones when I hear it. I could feel the direct line from this song to other groups like The Beastie Boys and Linkin Park, and the first time I heard it I thought "oh, this is what Limp Bizkit was *trying* to do the whole time".

Finally, we get to *Down with the King*, an EP that provides the interesting experiment of "what if a band did the same song, but five different ways?". It also gave me two a cappella tracks that were the only two songs I didn't enjoy all week, but I don't want to linger on that. Listening to the five versions of "Down with the King", I was amazed how the same song can sound so different, and even more surprised at how I could have such a strong preference between them all. The "Radio Version" provides a great baseline, with a very catchy groove (especially during the chorus), and the drum machine and turntable working great in concert with each other. The "Cool Breeze Mix" was easily my favorite of the five, though - it has a great bass line early in the song, the horns are really, really good, and the late turntable work is killer. "Down with the King (Landcruiser Mix)" gave me "Gin and Juice" vibes, and had a chill vibe that I liked. A strong turntable game and the sprinkling in of guitar/bass guitar here and there was a nice touch. The final two versions ("Richard Russell Mix" and the version featuring Pete Rock & C.L. Smooth) offered similar things to me, and didn't work quite as well as the first three versions - but I did like the occasional guitar and horns moments in the "Richard Russell Mix".

* Favorite Album: It should come as no surprise that this was *Raising Hell* for me. Every song was great, and it could have stopped after track four and been a monumental album. It had half of the tracks that were in consideration for my favorite song of the week - and the other songs on the album are still really good. It really highlights their groundbreaking fusion of hip-hop and rock.
* Favorite Song: Of course I want to say "Walk This Way" here, for so many reasons - but I kind of feel like I need to disqualify it simply because of how much Aerosmith's impact on the song raises it. So, with that said, "Tougher Than Leather" gets the nod here, simply because I "feel" the song more than any other song. It provides amazing rock music *and* amazing hip-hop music in a way that feels like it really is its own genre.

What an amazing week. I've had a lot of artists over the weeks that I've loved, but I'm not sure that I've had a week where the music felt so full of energy in the way it did this week. I'm so glad I finally got around to listening to Run-DMC. And now I'm off to listen to The Strokes.
