---
file: week22-TheSmiths.md
title: The Smiths
date: 2025-12-26
order: 22
---

After listening to the Smiths for a week, I’m not sure I know what to say or how to explain how I feel about them. There are some pieces I’m quite clear on, and a few that evolved enough over the course of a week that I wonder how those thoughts and feelings would change if I kept listening. But, without getting into too many details, here is the playlist:

* *The Smiths* (1984)
* *Hatful of Hollow* (1984)
* *Meat Is Murder* (1985)
* *The Queen Is Dead* (1986)
* *Strangeways, Here We Come* (1987)

Right off the bat, first song in, I wrote "Based on 'Reel Around the Fountain', this week may not be my jam" in my notes. Morrissey’s vocals hit me, and went over like a lead balloon. His performance was so dramatic; it felt like I should be watching a Broadway show instead of listening to alternative rock. Over the course of the week, this was the number one thing I struggled with, and spent the entire time waffling back and forth between whether I liked his vocal performances or not.

It feels right to pair *The Smiths* and *Hatful of Hollow* together, as the latter is a combination of singles and different recording sessions of songs on the former. Having the multiple versions of a handful of songs was interesting, because there were some where I preferred the album version, and others where I preferred the alternate recording. What often made the difference for me was whether or not the song felt like Morrissey performing with a backing band, or if the vocals were accompanying a strong musical performance. Overall, the more The Smiths felt like a band, the more I liked them; conversely, more often than not, when it felt like Morrissey with a backing band, I like them less.

Songs like "This Charming Man", "What Difference Does It Make", and especially "How Soon Is Now?" really fit this mold for me - strong musical songs where the vocals don't supersede the music. Songs like "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle", "Reel Around the Fountain", and "You've Got Everything Now" were too vocal-forward, and the melodramatic delivery just didn't work for me. And yet, things just weren't that simple. "Still Ill" is a song where I kept wondering whether I liked it or not, because at points I found Morrissey's performance growing on me. Then there is "Please Please Please Let Me Get What I Want", where his dramatic delivery actually fits the mood of the song, so it's a positive and not a negative. So two albums in, I don't know if I have an answer to the questions of whether I like The Smiths and whether I like Morrissey.

*Meat Is Murder* and *The Queen Is Dead* marked a change for me, where The Smiths felt more often like a complete band rather than Morrissey plus accompaniment. The music is stronger, and I started to realize this band is a balance of Johnny Marr's music and Morrissey's vocals. On my second listen, I was able to notice more of how I loved Marr's musicality throughout, but these albums really brought that to light. There are so many songs that have wonderful moments of bass, drums, and guitar - sometimes isolated, but more often they pair extremely well together. "I Know It's Over" is a perfect example of everything working together: the music builds up well, and Morrissey's vocals match the mood set by the music perfectly.

*Meat Is Murder* even gave me the gift of a song where Morrissey's performance is in full force that I loved. "Well I Wonder" has such a strong vocal mood to it, but that mood is set by the bass/drums/guitar so well. Even Morrissey's falsetto works for me (something that I disliked more often than not), and I felt myself drawn in by all parts of the song. It's songs like this that made me feel confused through a lot of the week - I'd love something vocally in "Well I Wonder" or "There Is a Light That Never Goes Out", but would feel like similar things hurt other songs.

Thankfully, on these two albums, most of the songs end up mostly working. Sure, there are a few songs where one thing doesn't work for me (lyrics of "Barbarism Begins at Home", the effect on the background vocals on "Bigmouth Strikes Again", and whatever the hell is going on in "Some Girls Are Bigger Than Others"). But overall, the music is so good in these two albums that I'm willing to overlook those. "Nowhere Fast", "What She Said", and "Cemetry Gates" all had great music, and more often than not the vocals paired well with the music, feeling more restrained and in a place with the music.

And finally, we come to *Strangeways, Here We Come*. I was split right down the middle on this one, liking half the songs and disliking the other half. There are flashes of brilliance, but some songs felt like an experiment that didn't pay off. There is a two-minute song in the middle of "Last Night I Dreamt That Somebody Loved Me", but the weird two-minute intro doesn't work for me, and the song kind of peters out at the end. "I Won't Share You" and "Unhappy Birthday" bring a return to too much Morrissey. And yet, the highs are high. The bass and guitar in "Girlfriend in a Coma" are great, and the strings in the middle are a perfect touch. "Paint a Vulgar Picture" pairs the music and vocals together well, and there is some awesome guitar playing in the middle. And the highlight of the album is "Stop Me If You Think You’ve Heard This One Before". The percussion to start the song gives it such an epic feel, and the song carries that throughout. The vocals are a perfect complement to the mood set, and there is some awesome guitar playing at the end. Not a perfect album at all, but what I liked I really liked.

End of the week, and I *think* I have answers to my questions. **Do I like The Smiths?** Yes, when they feel like a complete band. I don't know that I'll revisit them much, but there are a few songs that I really liked and would be more than happy to hear again. **Do I like Morrissey?** Not particularly, and I have zero desire to listen to his solo work. With that said, when his vocal performances work for me, they really do work. He emotes very well, just often too much for me - and in a way that sadly clashes with the music too much. But give me a "Well I Wonder" or "I Know It's Over", and I'll happily agree that his performance is a key part to the song that makes a strong song even stronger.

* Favorite Album: *The Queen Is Dead*, but *Meat Is Murder* is not far behind. If they knocked 3-4 songs off of each of these albums and combined them into one, it would be a really great album.
* Favorite Song: In a week where I had a strong #1 song, followed by three #2 songs, "How Soon Is Now?" is that strong #1. The music feels original and distinctive, the atmosphere of the song is amazing, and Morrissey's performance pairs really well with some standout instrumentation.

I came into this week knowing very little about The Smiths, but felt like I'd love them because I knew they were a foundational influence on some bands I really like, such as Radiohead and R.E.M. They didn't quite fulfill that for me, though I can absolutely feel the throughline from Johnny Marr's amazing musicality (something I didn't and couldn't say enough about here). The somewhat unfilled expectations, though, make me hesitant as next week I explore another artist that I've never listened to, but was an influence on several other bands I liked (including The Smiths!) - Siouxsie and the Banshees.
