---
file: week37-KateBush.md
title: Kate Bush
date: 2026-04-10
order: 37
---

I have seen Stranger Things, so I have heard "Running Up That Hill" countless times. I thought I was in for a week of that.

*Narrator: He was not...*

* *The Kick Inside* (1978)
* *Never for Ever* (1980)
* *The Dreaming* (1982)
* *Hounds of Love* (1985)
* *The Sensual World* (1989) <small>second playthrough only</small>
* *Aerial* (2005)

My first playthrough was a rough start. I was not expecting two things: her often overly dramatic style and delivery, and her *very* high falsetto. This falsetto sounded so out of place - it felt like it belonged in a very old animation like Snow White or a Broadway show (I often thought of Luisa in The Fantasticks), and was so out of place in pop music. It took about 2.5 albums before I got used to her intense falsetto at all - and at that point in her career, she was doing it far less. But those albums (mostly, I'll get to this shortly) felt hard to listen to the first time through.

So, when it came time to re-listen to those albums, I was not looking forward to it at all. And, somehow, things got a little better. *Never for Ever* still felt bad - the entire album felt like a collection of songs that were trying to be part of a musical, but didn't have one to be a part of. There were some nice musical moments in several songs. "The Infant Kiss" has a really good piano and strings arrangement, and the layered vocals (she does lead and background vocals), but it still didn't quite click for me. *The Dreaming* was better, but still had a lot of overly dramatic vocal moments that just didn't work for me. But "Night of the Swallow" has a simple musical arrangement (piano and drums, mostly), and some Uilleann pipes that come in and sound really good. The song kept pulling me in the longer I listened, and gave me hope for future albums.

But the real change happened with *The Kick Inside*. Yes, there were still moments where the falsetto threw me off, but for some reason more of the vocals worked for me. The piano playing (wonderful on *every* album) was great. A few songs stood out to me this time that I ended up liking, such as "James and the Cold Gun", which features a great beat with piano, guitars, and drums all complementing each other well - and then an organ comes through and the song feels even better. The piano in "Feel It" is extra good. "Oh to Be in Love" melds an acoustic guitar and piano together really well. And then there is the song that stood out to me both times through, one of my favorite songs of the week - "The Man with the Child in His Eyes". I don't know if it was because I was struggling with her falsetto the first time through, but I literally teared up 25 seconds into the song simply because the piano sounded so beautiful. An orchestra joins in later, and the strings add to the wonderful feel of the song. Her vocal performance is great as well - everything in the song complements everything else well, and the song is truly engaging.

*Hounds of Love* starts off with what I thought I'd be getting all week. "Running Up That Hill" is such a catchy song. All the vocals sound great; the synth and drums sound awesome together; the bass has a great beat to it. The energy of the song is poppin', and everything sounds great together. It makes sense to me why this song still lives on 40 years later. The rest of the album is strong - it doesn't quite live up to the magnitude of the first track, but this felt like a complete album that somehow felt cohesive while also taking some swings. Some songs made great use of orchestral instruments - the cello and drums play really well off of each other in "Hounds of Love"; the strings sound very good in "Cloudbusting", especially when the music pauses about 42 seconds in and then they come in even stronger. "And Dream of Sheep" highlights soft, tender vocal moments that are complemented by a sparse piano/Fairlight CMI/bouzouki arrangement. The Uilleann pipes, fiddle, and drums make for some great music in "Jig of Life", and "Hello Earth" had some of my favorite moments of any of her songs - the synth strings are gorgeous, and the song flat-out takes off when the choir and pipes are backing her around the 2:30 mark. Not every song was great, but there was more than enough for me to enjoy this album.

In my second playthrough, I added *The Sensual World*, and it was mostly a letdown after *Hounds of Love*. More than anything, my issue was the mix - the vocal tracks seemed so de-emphasized that they felt like an afterthought. But just when I thought the album was going to be a waste of time, I came to the end of it. There is a moment about 1.5 minutes into "Rocket's Tail", after the vocals have been building up, there is a transition and the guitar/bass/drums really kick in - and things sound and feel great. But that was really just setting me up for "This Woman's Work" - and it was at this point that I realized that one of my favorite "Kate Bush modes" was just Kate and a piano. The piano playing is, again, beautiful. Her vocals are strong, emotional, and engaging. The build-up at the end of the song feels earned and is really good. The song was good enough to make the whole album feel worth listening to just to get to it.

Finally comes the double album *Aerial*. This, again, felt like an album that benefited from a second listen. There are a few songs that still don't work for me - "An Architect's Dream" and "The Painter's Link" are two songs that I just could not connect with, and I still have no clue what is happening in "Aerial Tal" after listening to it twice. But, this album starts and ends strong. The album starts with "King of the Mountain" hitting you hard with the synth, has a solid build-up with strong vocals, and features a good combo of guitars, drums, bass. "Pi" almost feels like a gimmick (much of the vocals are just Kate singing digits of pi), but on second listen, I realized that the music is legit good. "How to Be Invisible" has a great rhythm with some really nice musical transitions. And my stars from this album are "A Coral Room" and "Nocturn". The piano arrangement is (yes, again) beautiful, and her vocal performance is strong and emotional. There is about 30 seconds in the middle where Kate and some guy sing about a "little brown jug" that I wish I could remove from the song, but I really like the rest of the song. But "Nocturn" was the bigger surprise for me. It's over eight minutes long, and I don't really love the first 1.5 minutes. It is at that point, though, that the bass and drums come in, and I dig the song. Everything sounds good from that point on; the lead vocals, her layered vocals, the synth, the piano, the guitar - they all create a great feel/mood and a catchy beat. Not a moment of the song after the start feels wasted.

I came into this week hoping I'd like Kate Bush, because I feel like following up Fleetwood Mac and *Rumours* was a really tough act to follow. Three albums in, outside of one song, I thought I hated her. And by the end, I found things that I really liked. Even some of the things I didn't like were still impressive - I can recognize that her vocal abilities are amazing. Her pitch, accuracy, range, and register shifts are all very, very impressive. When I liked it, I *really* liked it - despite the fact that I often found some of her styling off-putting. But when you just had "Kate and a piano", more often than not, I found myself sucked in. And I definitely didn't think I'd leave this week thinking "you know, those songs with the pipes and fiddle were some of my favorites", and while the pipes and fiddle won't be challenging my love for the piano and harmonica any time soon, I wouldn't mind hearing more songs like "Jig of Life" or "Hello Earth" soon. Listening to all I did this week felt more than worth it to find the things I really did like.

* *Favorite Album* - It should come as no surprise that it's *Hounds of Love*. It felt more complete, more cohesive than her other albums, and the chances she took worked for me. Oh, and it has "Running Up That Hill", her one song that I knew before this week and still really like.
* *Favorite Song* - you'd have to really run up that hill to pass "Running Up That Hill" for me. And somehow, "The Man with the Child in His Eyes" did it. It's just a gorgeous song. My wife bought me a decoration for my birthday that says "Music is what feelings sound like", and this song nails that.

Time for a major genre shift, as next week I move on to 2Pac.
