---
file: week30-TheStrokes.md
title: The Strokes
date: 2026-02-20
order: 30
---

I think I like The Strokes. Not in a David Bowie way, where I feel like I've found a new favorite artist kind of way. Not in a James Brown way, where I am super happy that I experienced his music and influence, and I really enjoyed it along the way - and I also know I won't really seek it out again in the future. And definitely not in a "I think I liked [*Diff'rent Strokes*](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0077003/), because I remember Gary Coleman saying 'What you talkin' 'bout, Willis?' when I was (at max) seven years old and I watched it because we only had three channels and it was 'what was on TV'" kind of way. But I still think I like them.


* *Is This It* (2001)
* *Room on Fire* (2003)
* *First Impressions of Earth* (2006)
* *Comedown Machine* (2013)
* *The New Abnormal* (2020)

The week didn't start out with me thinking I was going to end up as interested in The Strokes as it ended. For starters, I was actually surprised to learn they are a band of the last 25 years - I, for whatever reason, thought that they were older, perhaps contemporaries of band like The Cure (who, I came to find out, was a major influence on them). This simple confusion started the week off with a "this isn't what I thought I was going to get" feeling, which I wish didn't affect me, but it did.

That aside, the vocal performances in *Is This It* often detracted from the songs for me. It was either mixed in a way that it was overpowered by the music, or it was processed in a way I didn't love. It was just enough to kept me from getting into each song, despite almost always loving the music. And I'll spoil the lede a bit - I almost always loved the music all week long, which is the biggest thing that ended up brining me along. Whether it was the guitar early in "Is This It" (which made me think of the Pixies, so a solid move), the drums in "Soma", or the tempo and mood changes in "Someday", they were doing a lot of things musically that I really liked. And "Someday" - and even more, "Last Nite" - gave me a taste of what they could do when the vocals caught up to the music. They felt like complete songs and I really liked them (and, "Last Nite" gets the title of "one song I knew heading into this week, even though I didn't know it was their song).

*Room on Fire* didn't do a ton to change my mind in either direction. There is still some really good music, but there wasn't a single song that I look back on and think "I can't wait to hear that song again". Overall, this album felt weaker than *Is This It*, despite some good moments in songs like "Between Love & Hate", where the vocals work a little better (though it is still overpowered by the music), and there are some great tempo and mood changes throughout the song. But good moments from song to song do not a great album make.

My mind started to shift when listening to *First Impressions of Earth*. The second half of the album feels a bit unremarkable, but overall a combination of better vocals and killer music early on started to turn the dial for me. "You Only Live Twice" has a killer intro, and the tempo change 1-minute in really grabbed my attention. The music and vocals complement each other well - which thankfully started being the case more often than not throughout this (and the next few) albums. The other song that I really liked on this album was "Razorblade" - it's got a great groove, and was the vocal pinnacle for me to this point. Great groove throughout the song, with some fantastic guitar playing throughout.

Next we come to *Comedown Machine*, and we need to talk about "Tap Out". Feel free to go ahead and sit down; you can choose an entire seat, but you're only going to need the edge. The intro to this song (to quote my notes) "rocks my shit". When the music kicks in about 7-seconds in, I can find nothing wrong with the song at all. The music is awesome. The keyboards are fantastic. The vocals are great, and are well arranged with the music. This intro, let alone the entire song, made this week worth it. I could say nothing else about this album and it would still be a winner for me. The rest of the album doesn't hit the same high as "Tap Out", but really, that's a big ask - but there are still some good songs with some great moments. The vocals more often than not work for me on this album, with just a few moments of music overpowering them, or a processing effect that I didn't like. "Chances" and "Happy Ending" have some really good synth work. My new friend the mellotron makes a great appearance in "80's Comedown Machine, and my old pal the keyboard comes in strong in "One Way Trigger" and the aforementioned "Tap Out". All-in-all, we've got a nice upward trajectory from album to album.

And finally we arrive at *The New Abnormal*... and the trend continues. I can't say any moment in it lived up to the heights of "Tap Out", but song after song connected with me more than any of the previous albums. "Selfless" has a beautiful vibe to it (and feels like a Keane song), with the guitars and drum providing a backdrop for an emotional vocal performance. The keyboard and synth in "Brooklyn Bridge to Chorus" is stellar, and the music has amazing energy that I loved (with some fantastic drum transitions between different parts of the song). "Not the Same Anymore" is peak "storytelling" song for the band, with a great vocal performance and great guitar playing that somehow makes the song feel small and deep all at the same time. And the musical growth form the start to the end of "Ode To Teh Mets" is great, with the music slightly building the whole way through, and the synth and guitars arranged really well together. There was really only one song on the album I didn't like ("Why Are Sundays So Depressing"), but there was so much I did like that it didn't really matter.

Going through this journey left me in a pretty good spot with the band, as their later work was my favorite work. And seeing as how they are a current band, I'm left curious to see what they put out next. They started out strong musically and got even stronger - incorporating more instruments over time, and always doing a great job of arranging how both guitars work together. They vocal performances/mixes/processing started out very mixed for me, and they grew to a point there where I felt like the vocals were the strength in a few songs. For a band that I thought was 40+ years old, I'm wondering where they will go 25 years after their first album.

* Favorite Song: no shock here, but it's "Tap Out". I could listen to just the music on this song for a while, it's so good. I might go do that right now.
* Favorite Album: Easily *The New Abnormal*. In a week where I only highlighted 8 songs as my possible favorite this week, half of them came from this nine-song album.

And next week, for something completely different, Bob Marley is up.
