---
file: week46-Rush.md
title: Rush
date: 2026-06-12
order: 46
---

For those who have been waiting since my reference [21 weeks ago](https://www.barrylliumlabs.com/music/post.html?file=week25-PortugalTheMan.md), here you are: it was in this current decade that I learned Geddy Lee is a man. For 40+ years of my life, I always thought that the lead singer of Rush is a woman. And after listening to them for an entire week, I both feel silly and justified in that incorrect "knowledge".

Growing up, I heard "Tom Sawyer" an endless number of times. And I have never really liked the song - so I decided that I didn't like Rush as a whole. But I have also been aware that a lot of people *love* Rush. Because of that, I put them on this list to challenge that assumption. Let's see how that played out...

* “Working Man” (1974)
* “Fly by Night” (1975)
* *2112* (1976)
* *A Farewell to Kings* (1977)
* “La Villa Strangiato” (1978)
* *Permanent Waves* (1980)
* *Moving Pictures* (1981)
* *Signals* (1982)
* “Time Stand Still” (1987)

Starting off with "Working Man" and "Fly by Night", I immediately started to question my up-to-now lifelong stance. I was mixed on Geddy Lee's vocals, but I really liked the music. I especially liked "Fly by Night", with its great intro and distinctive bass line. The rhythm was super catchy, and I was starting to feel different about Rush already. **Status at this point: thinking that I might need to issue a mea culpa on my previous stance.**

*2112* decided to put this new direction in jeopardy immediately, though, with a large piece of Kryptonite - a 20-minute opening song. Note to all artists - if you are going to do this, at least have the decency to make this the final song on the album. Ironically, during my first listen, I wrote "Do not understand why this is not 7 songs instead of one". Then, on my second playthrough, I did a little research - to find out that this is *exactly* seven songs, that in later releases it *is* split out into their own tracks (and it's better off for it, and I really liked "Presentation" after listening to it this way). But even as a "single song", I found things I was liking - the biggest being that these are all REALLY good musicians. Every song had at least one moment where I was thinking "that's some really great drumming/bass playing/guitar playing" - and many songs had moments for each instrument. Beyond that, they all sounded really great together. I still had issues with Geddy Lee's vocals - his singing would lean into screaming territory - but other times I was starting to lean into his vocals as well. "Tears" was a great example of everything coming together, with a sparse musical arrangement and the vocals working really well together. Then, a minute in, the rest of the music kicks in, and the song gets more of a "full" feeling to it and flows even better. And it's hard to not like a mellotron, and they use it well in the song. The album as a whole was great music after great music, and I was starting to lean in even more. **Status: realizing I've been disliking Rush for no reason whatsoever.**

*A Farewell to Kings* didn't quite have the same effect on me as *2112*, but I think that was partially because I had already been swinging so far in the "I like this band" direction by this point. Even with that, though, "A Farewell to Kings" and "Xanadu" didn't quite come together for me as the previous album did, and I felt a bit let down. "Closer to the Heart", though, brings a fantastic guitar intro that ropes me in immediately, and everything builds up and transitions well throughout the entire song. The vocals work for me from start to end, even at their most dramatic they don't turn into screaming. Then, a few songs later, we get "Madrigal", and this was where I really started to pay attention to Geddy Lee's lower register. The slower feel of the song along with his vocals creates a really great feel, giving this album a few strong songs that I liked a lot. The album ends weirdly, though, with "Cygnus X-1 Book I: The Voyage" - a song that felt as disjointed as its title to me. **Status: wondering if I have over-corrected on my opinion.**

"La Villa Strangiato" didn't do much to sway me in any direction - as it has some nice moments and a good flow, but also goes on too long with too many portions that aren't engaging enough. But then *Permanent Waves* came along, and it hits the ground running with "The Spirit of Radio" and "Freewill". Turns out I kind of knew "The Spirit of Radio", and had I known it was Rush, I might have had a different opinion heading into this week. I really like this song - everything is great musically: the guitars set a tone, and the percussion is great whether it's subtle or driving the song. The overall groove of the song is infectious and the flow is great. Geddy Lee's vocals sit in a great part of his range. And the synth/bells are used sparingly but to great effect. Follow that up with "Freewill", which felt like a tour-de-force of drumming. Even though the song borders on going on too long, it also gets better as it goes.

The album continues with "Jacob's Ladder", a solid song that I wish hadn't added any synth and that I could cut out the middle of - and it might be a song I would really like at that point. Then we get two more strong songs in "Entre Nous" and "Different Strings". The 12-string acoustic guitar sounds great in "Entre Nous", and the song transitions really well in and out of the chorus. The mix of the three different guitars that Alex Lifeson plays in "Different Strings" sounds great with the bass, and the vocal performance is subtle-yet-strong. "Natural Science" closes out the album, with the bass and drums kicking in really well a few minutes in. Again, remove a few things (some weird synth sounds and vocal processing I don't like), and this is another really good song (especially in the middle where the synth does work well with the rest of the music). **Status: it's official, I like Rush.**

And now we come to the elephant in the room - *Moving Pictures*, and its initial track: "Tom Sawyer". I *really* tried to approach this song with fresh ears - especially the second time through. The bass and drums are really good early (Neil Peart is one of - if not the - best drummers I've heard all year). The bass sounds even better around the 1-minute mark, but the vocals suffer for me a bit around the same time. And then it happens - the synth comes in more, and the song goes in this synth-heavy direction over the next minute that I really don't like. Everything else musically is really good - but the synth is just too much, takes over the song at points, and it's not what I'm looking for at all. Still not a song I really like - but after this experiment I can see the appeal: the parts I like are really good. They just can't overcome the synth (and a few rough-for-me vocal moments) that I don't like.

But the album is not without songs I do like. "Red Barchetta" has a great restrained feeling early, with the music really melding well and the vocals fitting great within the confines of the music. From there, the song builds up really well to the end, where everything is firing off in a way that feels very earned. Near the end, "Witch Hunt (Part III of Fear)" brings some of my favorite guitar playing on the album, and unlike in "Tom Sawyer" they use the synth the exact right amount. **Status: if I liked "Tom Sawyer", I'd like this album more - but I still like this band.**

*Signals* might be the weakest entry this week for me, but "Subdivisions" is not to blame for that. "Subdivisions" has easily my favorite synth work of the week - and is up there with my favorites for the year. The synth is the driving force of the song, the music is fantastic and ridiculously catchy. The vocals go great with all of it, and again the drums are great.

From there, though, the album is "just solid". "Chemistry" starts out strong, has some good guitar, but loses me a little bit along the way. "Losing It" has some great bass and drums, and the electric violin is a differentiator, by itself elevating the song above most of the rest of the album. But by the end of the album, I feel like it's missing something that every other album brought - yet it was still a decent album. **Status: if this were their best album, I'd be disappointed - but pretty good for a 5th best album.**

At this point, I was thinking, "OK, one last song - this probably can't affect how I feel about them at all". And yet, they pulled out a secret weapon: add Aimee Mann to a song, and it will always be better. "Time Stand Still" is great. The music is great, the beat is very catchy, and her presence in the song is great. She works well with Geddy Lee, and gives this song something it could never have without it. **Status: nice late move, Rush - you didn't need it, but I appreciate it.**

So here I sit, a week later, and I can admit when I'm wrong. Rush is a *really* good band. Some of the best music I've heard all year; not a weak member of the band. I don't love Geddy Lee's vocals early (oddly enough, sometimes his vocals reminded me of Robert Plant - who I love - but also sounded bad at the same time), but as the albums rolled out, his style matured and he seemed to control his voice much better (all while playing a great bass). So, here it is world - Rush is good, I was wrong.

* Favorite album: easily *Permanent Waves* for me. Two powerhouse songs, two more I really liked, and two more that I liked (and with minor changes to each, I'm certain I would have really liked them as well). Can't ask for much more from an album.
* Favorite song: still not "Tom Sawyer". With as much as I like "Subdivisions", this goes to "The Spirit of Radio". Great intro, great transitions, everything about the song is cohesive and effective. Love the feel of the song from start to finish.

Next up, back to checking out an artist I have no pre-determined feeling about: Public Enemy

