---
file: week32-DeathCab.md
title: Death Cab for Cutie
date: 2026-03-06
order: 32
---

When I first heard the name "Death Cab for Cutie", I assumed that they were a death metal band (or something to that effect). At some point I think I realized that wasn't the case, but until this week, I had never heard a single song of theirs. I didn't even give them a listen after the infamous news article where an errant comma made it appear that Jennifer Aniston broke up with someone named "Death Cab" for a cutie lead singer named Ben Gibbard. ("Jennifer Aniston breaks up with Death Cab, for Cutie lead singer Ben Gibbard"). But now, after listening to the following, I know they are very much *not* a death metal band 😂

* *We Have the Facts and We're Voting Yes* (2000)
* *The Photo Book* (2001) <small>second playthrough only</small>
* *Transatlanticism* (2003)
* *Plans* (2005)
* *Narrow Stairs* (2008)
* *Asphalt Meadows* (2022)

This week started a bit off for me. *We Have the Facts and We're Voting Yes* suffered from a major issue that really kept me from getting into the album: the mix was off, or at least off for what I was looking for. In every song, the music was overpowering the vocals, to the point where it made it difficult for me to really hear and process the lyrics. In every song, I wanted the vocal track to be more prominent than it was. And this was in spite of me more often than not really liking the music; the songs still didn't feel *complete* to me. Almost every song on the album had a tone or feel that I liked. Highlighted in "Title Track" opening with a restrained arrangement until it kicks in around the 1:45-mark, and continuing through "Company Calls" (and to a lesser degree, "Company Calls Epilogue") and its engaging tempo shifts throughout, the album does a lot of things I liked musically. I kept finding myself thinking of some bands I've loved for decades, like [Weezer](https://weezer.com) and [Margot & the Nuclear So and So's](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Margot_%26_the_Nuclear_So_and_So%27s), as there is some shared DNA, with the music giving me a similar feel in many of the songs. But with the vocal mix being overpowered, I still couldn't quite get into the album.

I was on my second listen by the time I got to *The Photo Album*, but it was a big step up from *We Have the Facts and We're Voting Yes*. The sound mix was "fixed" for me, and I was able to start engaging with the vocal performance in the same way I engaged with the music - so both became highlights for me. The album is solid, with a continuation of great musical moments from the first album, and vocals that fit in really well with the music. The highlight for me was "Styrofoam Plates", a powerful song starting out with a sparse arrangement containing just guitar and vocals. About 40 seconds in, the music opens up and the song gets even better. And even with all I have to say about the music, what sets the song apart are the vocals and lyrics. A powerful narrative about dealing with the death (and previously the life) of a terrible father, delivered emotionally. Even though I didn't live the specifics of this song, I still connected with it, and the song does what I want all good songs do - it made me *feel*.

And now we come to *Transatlanticism* - where they really started to get to me. "The New Year" kicks off the album really strongly, with the music having a great groove and a new feeling of depth to it that I hadn't yet experienced, especially on *Facts*. The music continues to be great - and arguably makes a leap to be even better. There seemed to be an increase of songs with piano/organ/keyboard playing, which I am *always here for*. And the album ends with "A Lack of Color", which is where I first asked myself the question: "self, is the lead singer also providing the background vocals and harmonies?". After some research, I found out the answer was yes, and I grew to be even more impressed with the vocal performances from that point on.

This album, though, has a three-song stretch that takes this album up a level for me. This *almost* becomes a four-song stretch, as "The Sound of Settling" does a great job of combining a great beat with strong vocals - but [Strongbad](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NX03enzrSJ4) and I cannot condone the many uses of "bop ba" in the lyrics. "Tiny Vessels", "Transatlanticism", and "Passenger Seat", as the kids say, can get it. (Do the kids still say this? Did I just kill it as I typed that?). "Tiny Vessels" starts out with a light, airy tone early - with guitars (and later drums and bass) highlighting some emotional vocals. And then, around the 1:20-mark, the music kicks in more, and becomes an entirely different song... until it shifts back to the lighter tone again halfway through, building back up - but not quite to the musical height of earlier. It's almost like two songs in one, and I really like both of them.

"Transatlanticism" draws me in from the first key on the piano. Then the vulnerable vocals come in, and I am paying even more attention - the pacing of both is great. After about a minute and a half, the guitar starts in, and fits right into place with the keyboards and vocals. Then the drums come in around the 3-minute mark, and they feel so good it's like they've always been there. But here's the real magic of this song, though... it's almost 8 minutes long, roughly three minutes longer than I *"think"* any song should be. But, somehow, it manages to pull it off. From the musical progression through the first half, to when the choir joins near the end, the song keeps re-inventing what it is, evolving, adding an instrument, changing itself slightly, whatever it needs to do in order to keep me in it. The buildup through the second half is so good for me that I will give the high honor of saying it makes me think of Weezer's [Only In Dreams](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ha3QivnjbIU), which for my money might be the greatest "oh, wait, the song isn't over yet... and this is great!" song of all time. "Transatlanticism" isn't *quite* that good, but it's good enough to make me think of it, which says a lot.

But don't get out of your seat yet, because here comes "Passenger Seat". It's almost "Transatlanticism Part 2", as one song carries right into the next. The mood of the song is established immediately with some ambient sounds and a lone piano. The vocal performance is vulnerable, intimate, and engaging. The song almost makes you feel a part of it, with the ambient sounds encompassing everything, and everything else so sparse and directed right at the listener. There isn't much to the song, and that's its strength.

OK, ok, I've talked enough about *Transatlanticism*. Now it's time to talk too much about *Plans*. This album is where I really started picking up on the lyrics, connecting with songs even more. Right from *Marching Bands of Manhattan*, I was in on this album. The song sounds so big, building itself up every step of the way. And I could go on and say something about every song on this album, honestly - but I'll save you *some* of that, and only talk at length about *half* of them. "Soul Meets Body" is a great beat, with great (all Ben Gibbard) harmonies. Sometimes the guitar peaks through, and it feels like it's just noticeable enough to pick the song up, but not enough to take over - and it feels perfect. The tone shift halfway through is so good. And then there are the lyrics: “So brown eyes I'll hold you near, 'cause you're the only song I want to hear, a melody softly soaring through my atmosphere”. Lauren, if you're reading this, can we just pretend I wrote that line? Seriously, just give me this one 😉.

Next we come to a segment we haven't visited in a few weeks: what songs make Brett cry?! There is a two-fer this week, with "I Will Follow You Into the Dark" and "What Sarah Said". I sincerely hope that everyone reading this has someone in their life that makes these songs mean something to them. "If there's no one beside you when your soul embarks, then I'll follow you into the dark" - I mean, c'mon, why do you have to do this to me Death Cab? This song speaks to me (much like [this quote](https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/55076-i-ll-be-looking-for-you-will-every-moment-every-single) from "The Amber Spyglass"), and makes me think about my wife or me dying first (unless we Thelma and Louise it); that makes me feel both sad about that inevitable moment, and also so happy about all the love we've had together and the more that's still to come. I'm so lucky and grateful to have someone that I am very slowly walking towards an inevitable end with, together. And as much as "I Will Follow You Into the Dark" hit me, then comes this line from "What Sarah Said": "Love is watching someone die". Damn you, Death Cab.

It's not just about the lyrics in those songs, though - the music is great as well. In "I Will Follow You Into the Dark", it's the acoustic guitar accompanying the vocals that really grab me. In "What Sarah Said", the song builds up wonderfully over the first minute, and then right after "Love is watching someone die", there is a break in the music; then the song builds back up... only to pull back to just the keyboard after that. Throughout it all, the music does a great job of helping build the story that the emotional vocals are telling.

*Narrow Stairs* doesn't quite live up to the previous two albums, but it still has a lot to offer. Every song has the music I at this point have come to expect, with a few standouts. "No Sunlight" has two bass guitars, something I've never noticed before and it creates a really nice groove for the song. "Grapevine Fires" has some really great examples of layered vocals and harmonies (again, all Ben Gibbard), and the music ebbs and flows well between parts of the song. "Your New Twin Sized Bed" has some really good lyrics and tells an interesting story through metaphor (with some nice background keyboard work to boot). "Pity and Fear" is an interesting one, as it has a dark root feeling to it that is engaging, and somehow the guitar feels like it's trying to push hope into the song at times - a really cool musical mood and effect. My favorite song off this album, though, is "Talking Bird" - and I can't really say why. Part of me feels like the song is "not enough", but it still really works for me - it's full of emotion musically and vocally. It's a simple song, with the bass and drums setting a feeling of emotional longing, and then about 1.5 minutes in, the guitar adds to everything really well. And then in the final minute of the song, the keyboards come in and grab me even more.

Lastly, we come to *Asphalt Meadows* - and this album felt like it was missing something to me, something that makes me "want to listen" to it more. That thing might be Chris Walla, who left the band sometime between *Narrow Stairs* and *Asphalt Meadows*. There are still some really good musical moments, but often the album felt like it was searching for something they couldn't quite find musically. But I'll give a shout out to the two songs that did grab me: "Here to Forever" and "Wheat Like Waves". I really like every moment when the keyboards peak through the rest of the music, and overall the drums/guitar create a catchy beat, and I absolutely love how the song picks up with the guitar and drums for the chorus each time. And the lyrics speak well to that "what next" feeling that I think we all have in life sometimes. "Wheat Like Waves" has some great tempo shifts, and the guitar does an excellent job of mirroring the vocals at several points. The song was really engaging to me.

At their worst, Death Cab for Cutie still almost always found a way to deliver something that I liked musically. At their best, they pulled me into an emotional song and made me feel a range of emotions from sadness to joy (and sometimes both at once). They made it onto this list because I've heard a podcaster talk about them for years as his favorite band - and I always take note of when someone says that about someone that isn't The Beatles, The Rolling Stones, Queen, or any other band that makes sense within the zeitgeist as being someone's favorite artist. After a week of listening, I get it.

* Favorite album: For as much as I liked *Transatlanticism*, this goes to *Plans*. Here's a rule - you make me cry twice, you've most likely made an album I love. Beyond that, every song on this album is strong, an absolute listen-from-start-to-finish album.
* Favorite song: Not so easy. I had a lot to say about a lot of songs this week. There are the three songs in a row from *Transatlanticism* - I have a hard time not choosing one of them. But I'm going to give it to "I Will Follow You Into the Dark". We all know why.

Next up on the docket - Prince
